H a ndbo o k

o f

I n d e p e n d e n t
J o u r n a l i s m

H a n d b o o k

I n d ep e nd e nt
b y

o f

Jo u rn alis m

D e b o r a h

P o t t e r

Deborah Potter is executive director of NewsLab (www.newslab.org), an online resource center
for journalists in Washington, D.C., that she founded in 1998. She has taught journalism as a
faculty member at The Poynter Institute and at American University, and is a past executive
director of the Radio and Television News Directors Foundation. Potter leads workshops for
journalists in newsrooms across the United States and around the world. She is a featured
columnist writing about broadcast news for American Journalism Review and the author of
Ready, Set, Lead: A Resource Guide for News Leaders. Potter spent more than 20 years in TV news,
including 16 as a network correspondent for CBS News and CNN, covering the White House,
State Department, Congress, national politics, and environmental issues. She also hosted the
PBS TV series “In the Prime.” She has a BA from the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill and
a master’s degree from American University.

C o n t e n t s

1
What Is News?

2
[4]

Types of news
Where the news comes
from
The journalist’s role
Objectivity and fairness
News providers

5
Broadcast and
Online

[ 38 ]
Broadcast story forms
and terms
Broadcast writing
Sound
Pictures
Newscasts
Online news
Online story forms
Online writing

3

4

Getting the Story

Telling the Story

Five W’s and an H
Observation
Research
Sources
Interviews
Ground rules
Getting it right

Focus
Writing
Leads
Story structure
Endings
Attribution
Quotes and sound bites
Numbers

[ 12 ]

6
Specialized
Journalism

[ 22 ]

7
Ethics and Law
[ 46 ]

Beat reporting skills
Government and politics
Business and economics
Health, science, and the
environment
Police and courts
Sports
Questions journalists
should ask about polls

Editing the Story

[ 30 ]
Newspaper jobs
Broadcast jobs
The editor’s role
Copy editing
Coaching
Headlines, captions, and
teases
Graphics and visuals
Supervising

8
[ 54 ]

Ethical principles
Ethical decision-making
Ethics codes
Codes of conduct
Community standards
Legal issues

Journalism
Resources

[ 61 ]
Membership groups
Reporting and editing
Specialized journalism
Journalism training
Freedom of expression
Books
Ethics codes

INTRODUCTION

Journalism is both a profession and a craft, since journalists
draw on specialized skills and adhere to common standards.
So what makes journalism different from other occupations like
medicine or law, which could be described in similar terms?
Perhaps the greatest difference is the special role the news
media play in a free society.
A free press has often been called the oxygen of
democracy, because one cannot survive without
the other. The French political writer Alexis de
Tocqueville noted as much when he visited the
United States almost 200 years ago. “You can’t
have real newspapers without democracy, and
you can’t have democracy without newspapers,”
he wrote. Since then, that simple statement has
been proven true in nations all over the world.
Democracies, established or emerging, depend
on the consent of an informed citizenry, and
the news media are a primary source of the
information people need in order to govern
themselves.

To ensure that journalists are able to provide
that information, many countries have
established legal protections for a free press.
In the United States, for example, journalism
is the only profession mentioned in the
Constitution, which states: “Congress shall
make no law … abridging the freedom of speech
or of the press.” As Thomas Jefferson, the third
president of the United States, wrote in 1787,
“The basis of our government being the
opinion of the people, the very first object
should be to keep that right; and were it
left to me to decide whether we should
have a government without newspapers, or
newspapers without a government, I should
not hesitate a moment to prefer the latter.”
Journalists in a free society not only have
certain legal protections, they also have
responsibilities. In some countries, these
responsibilities are spelled out and in others
they are implicit. But in almost every case they
amount to the same thing: to keep citizens
informed, journalists have a responsibility
to provide information that is accurate and
reported fairly — and independently — from
outside influences.

2

“The central
purpose of
journalism is to
provide citizens
with accurate
and reliable
information they
need to function in

This handbook offers a brief introduction
to the fundamentals of journalism as it is
practiced in democratic systems — a journalism
that attempts to base itself on fact and not
opinion. Opinions have their place, but in the
best-edited newspapers they are confined to
the editorial pages and op-ed (guest writer)
columns. It is the kind of journalism I practiced
myself for more than 20 years as a reporter
and editor, and that I now teach in professional
workshops in the United States and around
the world. My goal is to provide a useful and
practical guide that will help all journalists do
better work for the communities they serve.

a f r e e s o c i e t y .”

In democratic societies around the world, the
news media have come to serve an additional
function as watchdogs on the activities of the
political and judicial branches of government.
They have kept democracies viable by giving
voice to the voiceless, ensuring that a ruling
majority cannot trample the rights of a
minority. A 19th century American writer
and humorist, Finley Peter Dunne, once
said that a journalist’s job is “to comfort the
afflicted and afflict the comfortable.” But the
primary role of journalism in a free society has
remained the same for generations. When a
U.S.-based group, the Committee of Concerned
Journalists, surveyed journalists about the
character of their profession at the very end of
the 20th century, they came to this common
understanding: “The central purpose of
journalism is to provide citizens with accurate
and reliable information they need to function
in a free society.”
Deborah Potter

3

1

4

W H AT I S N E W S?

The answer to the question “What is news?” may seem obvious.
News is what is new; it’s what’s happening. Look it up in the
dic tionar y, and you’ll find news described as “a repor t of recent
events or previously unknown information.” But most of the
things that happen in the world ever y day don’t find their way
into the newspaper or onto the air in a newscast.
So what makes a story newsworthy enough
to be published or broadcast? The real answer
is, it depends on a variety of factors. Generally
speaking, news is information that is of broad
interest to the intended audience, so what’s big
news in Buenos Aires may not be news at all in
Baku. Journalists decide what news to cover
based on many of the following “news values”:

Timeliness
Did something happen recently or did we
just learn about it? If so, that could make it
newsworthy. The meaning of “recently” varies
depending on the medium, of course. For a
weekly news magazine, anything that happened
since the previous edition the week before may
be considered timely. For a 24-hour cable news
channel, the timeliest news may be “breaking
news,” or something that is happening this very
minute and can be covered by a reporter live at
the scene.
Impact
Are many people affected or just a few?
Contamination in the water system that serves
your town’s 20,000 people has impact because
it affects your audience directly. A report that
10 children were killed from drinking polluted
water at a summer camp in a distant city has
impact too, because the audience is likely to
have a strong emotional response to the story.
The fact that a worker cut a utility line is not
big news, unless it happens to cause a blackout
across the city that lasts for several hours.

Proximity
Did something happen close to home, or did
it involve people from here? A plane crash in
Chad will make headlines in N’Djamena, but it’s
unlikely to be front-page news in Chile unless
the plane was carrying Chilean passengers.
Controversy
Are people in disagreement about this? It’s
human nature to be interested in stories that
involve conflict, tension, or public debate.
People like to take sides, and see whose position
will prevail. Conflict doesn’t always entail
pitting one person’s views against another.
Stories about doctors battling disease or citizens
opposing an unjust law also involve conflict.
Prominence
Is a well-known person involved? Ordinary
activities or mishaps can become news if
they involve a prominent person like a prime
minister or a film star. That plane crash in Chad
would make headlines around the world if one
of the passengers were a famous rock musician.
Currency
Are people here talking about this? A
government meeting about bus safety might
not draw much attention, unless it happens to
be scheduled soon after a terrible bus accident.
An incident at a football match may be in the
news for several days because it’s the main topic
of conversation in town.

5

Oddity
Is what happened unusual? As the saying goes,
“If a dog bites a man, that is not news. But if a
man bites a dog, it’s news!” The extraordinary
and the unexpected appeal to our natural
human curiosity.
What makes news also depends on the
makeup of the intended audience, not just
where they live but who they are. Different
groups of people have different lifestyles and
concerns, which make them interested in
different types of news. A radio news program
targeted at younger listeners might include
stories about music or sports stars that would
not be featured in a business newspaper aimed
at older, wealthier readers. A weekly magazine
that covers medical news would report on the
testing of an experimental drug because the
doctors who read the publication presumably
would be interested. But unless the drug is
believed to cure a well-known disease, most
general-interest local newspapers would
ignore the story. The exception might be
the newspaper in the community where the
research is being conducted.
News organizations see their work as
a public service, so news is made up of
information that people need to know in
order to go about their daily lives and to be
productive citizens in a democracy. But most
news organizations also are businesses that
have to make a profit to survive, so the news
also includes items that will draw an audience:
stories people may want to know about
just because they’re interesting. Those two
characteristics need not be in conflict. Some
of the best stories on any given day, in fact, are
both important and interesting. But it’s fairly
common for news organizations to divide
stories into two basic categories: hard news and
soft news, also called features.

6

Types o f News

H

ard news is essentially the news of the
day. It’s what you see on the front page
of the newspaper or the top of the
Web page, and what you hear at the
start of a broadcast news report. For example,
war, politics, business, and crime are frequent
hard news topics. A strike announced today
by the city’s bus drivers that leaves thousands
of commuters unable to get to work is hard
news. It’s timely, controversial, and has a wide
impact close to home. The community needs
the information right away, because it affects
people’s daily lives.
By contrast, a story about a world-famous
athlete who grew up in an orphanage would fit
the definition of soft news. It’s a human-interest
story involving a prominent person and it’s an
unusual story that people likely would discuss
with their friends. But there’s no compelling
reason why it has to be published or broadcast
on any particular day. By definition, that makes
it a feature story. Many newspapers and onlinenews sites have separate feature sections for
stories about lifestyles, home and family, the
arts, and entertainment. Larger newspapers
even may have weekly sections for specific
kinds of features on food, health, education, and
so forth.

Topic isn’t the only thing that separates hard
news from features. In most cases, hard news
and soft news are written differently. Hard
news stories generally are written so that the
audience gets the most important information
as quickly as possible. Feature writers often
begin with an anecdote or example designed
primarily to draw the audience’s interest, so the
story may take longer to get to the central point.
Some stories blend these two approaches.
Stories that are not time-sensitive but that focus
on significant issues are often called “news
features.” A story about one community’s
struggle to deal with AIDS, for example, is a
news feature. A story about a new treatment
option for AIDS patients would be hard news.
News features are an effective way to explore
trends or complex social problems by telling
individual human stories about how people
experience them. (We’ll discuss these different
writing styles in more detail in Chapter 3,
“Telling the Story.”)

Whe re the News Co me s Fro m

J

ournalists find news in all sorts of places,
but most stories originate in one of three
basic ways:
• naturally occurring events, like disasters
and accidents;
• planned activities, like meetings and news
conferences;
• reporters’ enterprise.
Unplanned events frequently become major
news stories. A ferry sinking, a plane crash, a
tsunami, or a mudslide is newsworthy not just
when it happens but often for days and weeks
afterwards. The extent of the coverage depends
in part on proximity and who was involved. A
fatal automobile accident in Paris might not be
big news on any given day. But an accident in
Paris in 1997 was a huge news story, not just in
France but also around the world, because one
of the victims was Britain’s Princess Diana.
Citizens who witness a disaster will often
contact a news organization. Journalists also
learn about these events from first responders:
police, fire, or rescue officials. In some

countries, news organizations are able to
monitor emergency communications between
first responders and can dispatch journalists to
the scene quickly so they can watch the story
unfold.
In many newsrooms, the most obvious
source of news is the daily schedule of events
in town, which includes government meetings,
business openings, or community events.
Often called a “daybook,” this list of activities is
not automatically newsworthy but it provides a
good starting point for reporters searching for
news. Reporters who regularly cover specific
kinds of issues or institutions, also called “beat”
reporters, say they often get story ideas by
looking at agendas for upcoming meetings.
Press releases can be another source of
news, but again, they are just a starting point.
Dozens of press releases arrive in newsrooms
every day, by mail, by fax, or even on video via
satellite. Government officials and agencies
generate many of them, but other large
organizations like private businesses and nonprofit groups also issue press releases to let
the news media know what they are doing. A
press release may resemble a news story but
because it is produced by someone with a
vested interest in the subject it is not likely to
tell the complete story. Press releases may be
factually correct, but they usually include only
those facts that reflect positively on the person
or organization featured in the release. Even if
a press release looks newsworthy, a professional
journalist first must verify its authenticity, and
then begin asking questions to determine the
real story before deciding if it’s worth reporting.
Staged events, such as demonstrations,
also can produce news, but journalists must be
wary of being manipulated by the organizers
who want to tell only their side of the story.
Politicians have become adept at staging events
and “photo opportunities” in order to attract
coverage, even when they have no real news
value. That does not mean journalists should
ignore these events, but only that they need to
do additional reporting to get a complete story.

7

Most reporters say their best stories come
from their own enterprise. Sometimes story
suggestions come from strangers, who may
visit, telephone, or e-mail the newsroom
with a complaint or concern. Some news
organizations actively solicit ideas from people
who live in the communities they serve, by
providing a telephone number or an e-mail
address where suggestions can be submitted.
Journalists spend a lot of time building
relationships with people who can provide them
with information. (We’ll talk more about source
building in Chapter 2, “Getting the Story.”)
Journalists frequently find stories simply by
looking around and listening to what people are
talking about. What you overhear at a sports
event or in line at the post office could turn into
a news story. Ask the people you meet when
you are not covering a story what is going on
in their lives or their neighborhoods and you
might find yourself on the trail of a news story
no one else has covered.
Another way to find news is to ask what
has happened since the last time a story was
in the paper or on the air. Follow-ups often
lead to surprising developments that are even
more newsworthy than the original report.
For example, a story about a fire the day after
it happened might tell you how many people
were killed and the extent of the property
damage. But a follow-up several weeks later
could discover that a faulty radio system made
it impossible for firefighters to respond quickly
enough to save more lives.
Documents, data, and public records can
lead to terrific stories as well. Reporters can use
them to look for trends or to spot irregularities.
This kind of work requires more effort, but the
results are almost always worth the trouble. It’s
considerably easier when the data are made
available electronically, of course, but reporters
have been known to enter data from paper
records into computer database programs
just so they can search for the most significant
information in a pile of statistics. For example,
a list of people who have received speeding
tickets might yield a story if it could be sorted
by name instead of date. That’s how television
8

reporter Nancy Amons learned that one driver
in her town had managed to amass a dozen
traffic violations in three years and had even
caused an accident that killed another driver
without ever losing his driver’s license. When
she investigated, city officials admitted they had
failed to do their job.

Th e J o ur n a l ist ’s R o l e

N

ew technologies have made it possible
for anyone with a computer to
disseminate information as widely as
the largest news organizations. But
a well-designed Internet site, no matter how
well it’s written or how often it’s updated, is not
necessarily a reliable source of news. The truth
is that in a complex world where information
is no longer a scarce commodity, the role of the
journalist has become more important than ever.
Unlike a propagandist or a gossip, the
journalist sorts through the information
available and determines how much of it is
valuable and reliable before passing it on to the
public. News stories, whether hard news or
features, must be accurate. Journalists not only
collect the information they need to tell the
story, they have to verify the information before
they can use it. Journalists rely on first-hand
observation whenever possible and consult

In a complex world
where information
is no longer a scarce
commodit y, the role
of the journalist
has become more

Keller, executive editor of The New York Times,
is “applying judgment to information.”
Unlike other purveyors of information,
journalists owe their primary allegiance to the
public. As Canada’s Montreal Gazette states
in its code of ethics, “A newspaper’s greatest
asset is its integrity. Respect for that integrity is
painfully won and easily lost.” To maintain that
integrity, journalists work hard to avoid conflicts
of interest, real or perceived. (We’ll talk more
about that in Chapter 7, “Ethics and Law.”)

i m p o r t a n t t h a n e ve r.
Objec t iv it y a n d Fa ir n ess

multiple sources to make sure the information
they receive is reliable. And, except on rare
occasions, they identify the sources of their
information so the audience can evaluate its
credibility.
But journalism is more than just the
distribution of fact-based information.
Propaganda also may be based on facts, but
those facts are presented in such a way as to
influence people’s opinions. As we’ve already
noted, public relations professionals use facts,
as well, but may tell only one side of a story.
Journalists, on the other hand, strive to be fair
and complete. They strive to tell an accurate
and authentic story, one that reflects reality, not
their own perception of it or anyone else’s.
Another distinction between journalism
and other forms of information is that
journalists strive for independence from
the people they cover. A public relations
professional who is employed by the
organization he or she is writing about is
unlikely to include information that might make
the organization look bad. A journalist, on the
other hand, will attempt to provide a complete
picture, even if it is not entirely positive.
Journalists are not mere transmission belts
for their own viewpoints or for information
provided by others. They do original reporting,
they do not confuse fact with opinion or rumor,
and they make sound editorial decisions. A
principal responsibility of journalism, says Bill

T

he concept of objectivity in journalism
developed almost a century ago, as a
reaction to the sensational, opiniondriven reporting that was common
in most newspapers of the day. The term
“objectivity” was originally used to describe a
journalistic approach or method; journalists
would seek to present the news in an objective
way, without reflecting any personal or
corporate bias.
Over time, objectivity was required from
the journalists themselves. The executive
editor of the American newspaper The
Washington Post, Leonard Downie, took the
concept so seriously that he refused to register
to vote. But many journalists today concede
that total objectivity is impossible. In 1996,
the U.S. Society of Professional Journalists
dropped the word “objectivity” from its code of
ethics. Journalists are human beings, after all.
They care about their work and they do have
opinions. Claiming that they are completely
objective suggests that they have no values.
Instead, journalists have largely agreed that they
must be aware of their own opinions so they
can keep them in check. The audience should
not be able to tell from the story what the
journalist’s opinion is. By using an objective,
scientific method for verifying information,
journalists can report stories that do not reflect
their own personal views. The story itself, in
other words, should be impartial and fair.
9

Journalists also strive to be fair in their
reporting by not telling one-sided stories.
They look for contrasting views and report on
them without favoring one side or another. In
addition to verifying assertions of fact, they will
seek out differing opinions in cases where the
facts are in dispute.
Fairness is not the same thing as balance,
however. Balance suggests that there are only
two sides to any story, which is rarely the case,
and that each side should be given equal weight.
Journalists who seek that kind of artificial
balance in their stories actually may produce
coverage that is fundamentally inaccurate. For
example, the vast majority of independent
economists may agree on the consequences of a
particular spending policy while a small handful
has a different opinion, which has been proven
wrong by past experience. A story giving equal
time or space to the views of both groups would
be misleading.
The challenge for journalists is to report
all significant viewpoints in a way that is
fair to those involved and that also presents
a complete and honest picture to the audience.
“Fairness means, among other things, listening
to different viewpoints, and incorporating them
into the journalism,” says reporter and blogger
Dan Gillmor. “It does not mean parroting lies
or distortions to achieve that lazy equivalence
that leads some journalists to get opposing
quotes when the facts overwhelmingly support
one side.”

News Prov id e r s

J

ournalists the world over share certain
characteristics. They are curious and
persistent. They want to know why
things happen and they don’t take no for
an answer. They are not intimidated by the
powerful and they care deeply about the work
they do. Kevin Marsh, an editor at the British
Broadcasting Company’s (BBC) Radio 4, says
a good journalist has “the ability to grasp the
big truths — with the humility to let them go
again when the facts don’t fit.” A journalist’s

10

job is challenging and complicated. As Philip
Graham, late chairman of the board of the
Washington Post Company, once said, “(A
journalist has the) inescapably impossible task
of providing every week a first rough draft of
a history that will never be completed about a
world we can never understand.”
Journalists today have more outlets for their
work than at any other time in history, from
small community newspapers to worldwide
television news channels and online-news
sites. Each of the media outlets has different
strengths and weaknesses.
In most countries, daily newspapers
generally have the largest staffs and offer
more depth on a wider range of topics than
the broadcast media. With the addition of
online sites, many newspapers have begun to
overcome the limitations of their traditional
once-a-day publication schedule. But they
largely reach only a literate, affluent audience,
people who can read and who have enough
money to buy the newspaper or have access to a
computer to read it on line.
Radio, one of the most widely used sources
of news in the world, has the advantage of
speed and easy availability. Radio journalists
can get the news on the air quickly and anyone
with a battery-powered radio can hear the news
almost anywhere at any time. Radio reporters
tell stories with sound as well as words, so
listeners feel they have experienced some of
what the event was really like. Radio news is
on the air many times a day, so it is frequently
updated. But most radio stations provide only
a limited amount of time for each newscast,
which tends to be a short summary of only the
biggest stories, without the depth or breadth
that a newspaper can offer.
With both sound and pictures, television
newscasts can show viewers what is happening,
not just tell them about it. One of television’s
strengths is its ability to convey emotion and
share experiences with viewers. Technological
advances — smaller cameras, digital editing,
and mobile uplinks — have made it possible for
television to be almost as fast as radio in getting a
story on the air. But the medium’s dependence

on pictures can be a drawback: Television news
sometimes avoids telling complicated stories
because they are not visually compelling.
Recently, the distinction between the
traditional categories of print and broadcast
news has blurred. In the United States and
other countries, many news organizations
now produce news in a variety of media,
including the Internet. Since the Internet
is infinitely expandable, online news is not
necessarily subject to the same restrictions
of space and time imposed on the print and
broadcast media. News sites can provide more
information and keep it available for a longer
time. And they can make it possible for users to
search for the news that most interests them.
Online-news sites affiliated with
newspapers, radio, and television stations may
look very similar. They illustrate their stories
with photographs, and many offer streaming
video of stories or complete newscasts.
They also may supply a “podcast” version,
publishing their files to the Internet so that
their subscribers can download the files onto
a computer or portable media player for later
consumption. On some sites, you can read the
text of a story or listen as the writer reads it to
you. News organizations are even posting their
own Web logs (commonly known by the shorthand term “blogs”), letting journalists write
online diaries about the stories they’re covering
or the decisions being made in the newsroom.
In this evolving world of news, many
journalists find they need additional skills to do
the job that is expected of them. Reporters may
be expected to shoot photographs for use on
the Internet, in addition to interviewing sources
and writing stories for the newspaper. Editors
may be asked to post stories on the Internet,
in addition to checking reporters’ copy and
writing headlines. Photographers may need
to shoot video as well as still pictures, and they
also may have to provide text to go along with
their pictures. Many news organizations are
providing training for journalists who are taking
on new roles in the newsroom. And some
journalism educators are now implementing
what they call a “convergence curriculum” to

help students learn the multiple skills they may
need in the future.
But for all these new demands, the heart
of good journalism remains the same. As Bill
Kovach and Tom Rosenstiel write in their book,
The Elements of Journalism: What Newspeople
Should Know and the Public Should Expect,
there are some clear principles that journalists
in a democratic society agree on and that
citizens have a right to expect:
• Journalism’s first obligation is to the truth.
• Its first loyalty is to citizens.
• Its essence is a discipline of verification.
• Its practitioners must maintain an
independence from those they cover.
• Journalism must serve as an independent
monitor of power.
• It must provide a forum for public criticism
and compromise.
• It must strive to make the significant
interesting and relevant.
• It must keep the news comprehensive and
proportional.
• Its practitioners must be allowed to exercise
their personal conscience.
These values distinguish journalism from
all other forms of communication. Abiding by
them is not easy. Journalists face pressure to
compromise on these standards almost every
day. But keeping them in mind is the best
way to ensure that journalism can serve its
primary function, supplying citizens with the
information they need to make decisions about
their lives.

11

2

12

G E T T I N G T H E S TO RY

The tip came in an e -mail from a former government official
who suggested looking into the supply of life rafts on ferries in
Washington state. Repor ter Eric Nalder, then with the Seattle
Times, decided to check it out. His first phone call was to
the ferr y system’s safety direc tor, who was new on the job,
but who gave Nalder the name and location of
his predecessor. When the reporter reached
the retired director by phone, he confirmed the
shortage of life rafts. Far from being satisfied
that he had uncovered a good story, Nalder was
just getting started.
To get the full story, Nalder needed
documents showing the number of life rafts
on every ferry, the capacity of each raft, and
the maximum number of passengers each
ferry could carry. He had to analyze the data
to determine the seriousness of the shortage.
He also wanted to ride the ferries and talk to
passengers and crew. Only then was he ready
to write his front-page story, which revealed
that ferries in his state had only enough life rafts
to evacuate one passenger out of seven.
Reporting is a painstaking process that
involves collecting facts and checking them
carefully for accuracy. Journalists sometimes
witness stories first-hand, but more typically
they learn the details from others who have
experienced something directly or who are
experts in the topic. That information is
reinforced or corroborated by additional
sources, and checked against documentary
evidence in public records, reports, or archives.
The information a journalist collects should
answer questions that are commonly known as
the five W’s and an H: who, what, where, when,
why, and how. Depending on the complexity of
the story, a reporter might ask those questions
in several different ways.

WHO:
• Who is involved in this story?
• Who is affected by it?
• Who is the best person to tell the story?
• Who is missing from this story? Who has
more information about this?
• Who is in conflict in this story? Do they have
anything in common?
• Who else should I talk to about this?
WHAT:
• What happened?
• What is the point of this story? What am I
really trying to say?
• What does the reader, viewer, or listener need
to know to understand this story?
• What surprised me? What is the most
important single fact I learned?
• What is the history here? What happens
next?
• What can people do about it?
WHERE:
• Where did this happen?
• Where else should I go to get the full story?
•W
 here is this story going next? How will
it end?
WHEN:
• When did this happen?
• When did the turning points occur in this
story?
• When should I report this story?

13

WHY:
•W
 hy is this happening? Is it an isolated case
or part of a trend?
•W
 hy are people behaving the way they are?
What are their motives?
•W
 hy does this story matter? Why should
anyone watch, read, or listen to it?
•W
 hy am I sure I have this story right?
HOW:
•H
 ow did this happen?
•H
 ow will things be different because of what
happened?
•H
 ow will this story help the reader, listener, or
viewer? The community?
•H
 ow did I get this information? Is the
attribution clear?
•H
 ow would someone describe this story to
a friend?
Many reporters use mental checklists like
this one to make sure they have covered all of
the important elements of a story.

Obs er vation

O

n-the-scene observation is one of
the fundamentals of good reporting.
Journalists want to witness events for
themselves whenever possible so they
can describe them accurately to the audience.
Good reporters use all of their senses on the
scene. They look, listen, smell, taste, and feel
the story so the audience can, too.
To do this well, journalists need an accurate
record of their observations. A print reporter
can do his or her job with a notebook and
a pencil or pen, but many also carry audio
recorders and cameras, especially if they are
expected to file stories for an online edition
as well. For radio, journalists need to capture
sound, and for television, both sound and video.

14

Good reporters
use all of their
senses on
the scene.

Using a recorder is one way of making sure
that any quotations you might use are accurate.
But electronics have been known to fail, so it’s
important for all journalists to be skilled notetakers. Here are some tips on note-taking from
experienced reporters:
• Write down facts, details, thoughts, and ideas.
Make clear which is which, and where they
came from.
• Draw diagrams of rooms, scenes, or items in
relationship to each other.
• Always get correctly spelled names, titles, and
contact information. Ask for birth date and
year, to make sure you have the person’s age
right.
• Spell out interview ground rules in the
notebook.
• Don’t crowd the notebook. Leave space for
annotating notes.
• Leave the inside covers blank to write down
questions to ask later.
• Annotate the notes as soon as possible.
Many reporters use their own shorthand
for common words so they can take notes
more quickly. Then they annotate their
notes, spelling out abbreviations to avoid any
confusion later. They also will mark the most
important information they have learned, good
quotes they may use in the story, anything they
need to follow up on or check for accuracy, and
questions that still need to be answered.
It sounds obvious, but reporters must
be sure they have the tools they need before
heading out to cover a story: notebook, pen,
tape or digital recorder, and fresh batteries.
There’s nothing more embarrassing than

arriving on the scene only to discover there
is no film or tape in the camera, or that the
only pen in your pocket is out of ink. Today’s
journalists often carry additional tools: a mobile
telephone and a laptop computer. A few other
simple items can be useful, as well. Putting a
rubber band around your notebook to mark the
next blank page makes it easy to find quickly. A
plastic bag will protect your notebook when it
rains, so the pages stay dry and the ink doesn’t
run. A small pair of binoculars will help you see
what’s going on even if you can’t get very close.
A calculator will help you convert information
like the number of tons of fuel carried by
an aircraft into terms more familiar to the
audience, in this case, liters or gallons.

R ese a rc h

J

ournalists tend to collect much more
information than they can put into a
story, but that information always helps
them better understand the event or issue
they are covering. Sometimes, background
information is essential to give a story deeper
meaning. In Eric Nalder’s story about life rafts,
for example, he included the fact that the water
the ferries cross is cold enough in January to kill
someone within half an hour. That information

puts the shortage of life rafts in context by
explaining more clearly why it matters. It’s
exactly the kind of information reporters look
for when they do research on a story, either
before they leave the newsroom or along the
way as questions come up.
Journalists have more research tools
available today than ever before, thanks to
computers and the Internet. Many of them are
just high-tech versions of the basic tools of the
trade: directories, almanacs, encyclopedias, and
maps. Others are databases and reports that
would have been much harder to find in the
days before the Internet, requiring a personal
visit to a library or government building. Still
others are resources that few would have
imagined two decades ago when the Internet
was young: search engines, blogs, chat rooms,
and e-mail lists. All of these resources are
useful to journalists collecting background
on a story. But one of the most basic research
tools has not changed in a century: the news
organization’s own library of previously
published or broadcast stories. Whether these
“clips” are kept on paper in filing drawers or in
computer files, they are a useful starting place
for all kinds of stories. Many journalists also
keep their own “clip files” of stories they have
saved about specific topics.
Imagine that the former president of a
neighboring country has died. A reporter
assigned to write the story would want to
know some basic facts: age, cause of death, and
where and when he died. But the journalist
would also want information about his time
in office, and how the country has changed
since he was president. A first step would be
to consult previous news reports, either in the
newsroom’s archive or online. Those reports
might mention someone who was close to the
former president, whom the reporter could ask
for an interview. The reporter would want to
have some background on that person before
conducting the interview, and might learn that
the former president’s friend kept all of his
letters, which could reveal some surprising new
information.
15

Doing an interview without having done
any background research is like driving to an
unfamiliar place without consulting a map. You
might get where you intend to go, but it’s just as
likely that you will miss a turn along the way.

S o urce s

R

eporters use both primary and
secondary sources when reporting news
stories. A primary source could be an
interview with a person who has direct
experience of an event or topic, or an original
document related to that topic. The journalist
as eyewitness also is considered a primary
source. A secondary source might be a written
report based on the original document. In the
case of a fire, for example, the person whose
house burned down would be a primary source.
So would a firefighter who had been involved in
putting out the fire. But the press release issued
by the fire department the next day would be a
secondary source.
One rule of thumb reporters follow when
researching a story is that no single source can
provide all of the information they might need.
In the case of the former president, each source
the reporter consulted led to another source.
Sometimes, sources contradict each other. To
clear up discrepancies, reporters may have to
see where the weight of the evidence lies or
seek out original sources, such as documents,
to determine which version is true. Secondary
sources are most useful as a way of confirming
information acquired from primary sources.
Whatever sources you use to research the
background of a story, it’s critical to consider
the validity or credibility of the source. These
days, anyone can design a professional-looking
Web site, or arrange to send an e-mail that
looks authentic but is really a hoax. Just
because you can find it online does not mean
that it’s true. Journalists need to verify the
source of all information to determine whether
it’s credible enough to use in a news story.

16

Good reporters
“work” their
sources regularly,
contacting them
to ask if anything
interesting is
happening.

Deciding what sources to use for a story is
a large part of a journalist’s job. Here are some
useful questions for evaluating whether you
have chosen the right source or the best source
for your story.
• How does this source know what he or she
knows? (Is this person in a position to know
these things, either personal or professional?)
• How can I confirm this information through
other sources or through documents?
• How representative is my source’s point of
view? (Is this just one person who complains
loudly about the landlord, because they
have a personal problem? Or is this the
most articulate voice speaking for an entire
group of tenants who have serious, legitimate
problems?)
• Has this source been reliable and credible in
the past?
• Am I only using this source because it’s the
easy way to go or because I know I’ll get
something I can use?
• What is the source’s motive for providing
information? (Is this person trying to make
himself look good, or to make his boss look
bad? Why is he or she talking to me in the
first place?)

Once you discover a helpful source of
information for one story, it’s a good idea to
stay in touch with that person over the long
term. Get as much contact information as
possible for every source, not just an office
address and telephone number, but mobile and
home telephones and e-mail addresses as well.
Good reporters “work” their sources regularly,
contacting them to ask if anything interesting
is happening. Make it easy for sources to get in
touch with you, as well, by giving your business
card to everyone you meet on a story.
Anyone with access to information,
including secretaries and clerks, can be a useful
source for a journalist. They can provide copies
of documents, and they often know who is the
most knowledgeable person on a given topic.
A reporter who treats them with respect may
find his or her request for an interview with the
secretary’s supervisor accepted more quickly.

I nte r v iews

A

merican reporter Kristin Gilger says,
“Skillful interviewing is the basis for
all good reporting and writing.” An
interview is defined as information,
opinion, or experience shared by a source in
conversation with a reporter. What makes an
interview a little different from an ordinary
conversation is that the reporter determines the
direction of the questioning.
Setting up an interview is not always easy.
People may not want to talk with a journalist,
especially if the story is controversial. When
dealing with public officials, start from the
premise that the public has a right to know
what the officials are doing. Experienced
reporters have found they can persuade
even the most reluctant officials to agree to
an interview by anticipating the excuses and
roadblocks they may use.
• Th
 ey don’t have time.
The reporter can offer to meet at the most
convenient time or place for the person they
want to speak with. Limiting the amount of
time requested also may help.

• Th
 ey are afraid because they think the story
will make them look bad.
Treating people with respect and telling them
precisely why you want to talk with them will
help sources be less anxious.
• Th
 ey don’t know what to say.
Reporters need to be clear about why the
story needs a particular person’s point of view.
• Th
 ey are hard to reach.
Reporters often have to go through a
secretary or public relations officer to
contact the person they want to interview. If
they suspect that their request is not being
forwarded, some reporters will write a letter
to the source, or call during lunch or after
business hours in an effort to get through.
Once you have secured the interview and
researched the person and the topic, there is
still more preparation to do. Most reporters
develop a list of questions or topics, which they
take with them but do not read from during
the interview. Instead, they refer to the list only
near the end to make sure they haven’t forgotten
something important. The list also includes
other information, documents, or photographs
they want to obtain from that source.
Questions are the backbone of an interview.
They are the rudder, keeping the ship going in
the right direction. Good questions can reward
you with unexpected answers, rich information,
and surprises. Poor questions can leave you
wondering why you bothered to talk to that
person anyway. Questions that are too specific
can lead you down the wrong trail.

“Skillful interviewing
is the basis for
all good reporting
a n d w r i t i n g .”

17

The first question in an interview is
important because it sets the tone for what
follows. A lot of journalists like to begin with an
“ice-breaker” question that lets the source relax.
It’s something they’re comfortable answering. It
may, in fact, have nothing to do with the reason
you are there. But often it helps to establish
your credentials with the source, and that can
establish a sense of trust and openness.
Most of the time, the best questions are
open-ended questions that cannot be answered
with a simple yes or no. They are also nonjudgmental, in that they do not establish the
reporter’s point of view. It’s the difference
between, “What do you think about that?” and
“What could you have been thinking!” While
it’s important to ask good questions, it’s also
important to be quiet and let the interviewee
talk. Good journalists are good listeners, and
often learn the most significant information
by being silent. What you hear also can lead
to additional questions that may not have
occurred to you.

18

Robert Siegel, who works for National
Public Radio in Washington, D.C., tells the story
of an interview he did with a Turkish diplomat
after Pope John Paul II was shot and wounded
by a Turk in Rome. His first question, “Do you
know any details about this man, Mehmet
Ali Agca; where he lived in Italy, what he did
there, what kind of visa the Italians gave him?”
The answers were all no. After several more
tries, Siegel paused, about to give up. And the
diplomat filled the silence with this, “… except
that he is the most famous convicted murderer
in Turkey, who escaped from prison after
assassinating the editor of one of our major
newspapers.” Siegel says he almost lost a good
story by asking questions that were too narrow.
He acknowledges that a better way to open the
interview might have been, “Tell me about
this man.”
Reporters can do interviews in person,
by telephone, or online via e-mail or instant
messaging. Each approach has advantages
and disadvantages. Interviewing in person
gives the reporter a more complete sense of
the individual. What kinds of photos are on
the wall? Is the desk messy or neat? What
books are in the bookcase? Meeting in person
also gives the reporter the ability to judge the
source’s credibility based on his demeanor.
Does he look nervous or comfortable? Is she
willing to look the reporter in the eye?
Christopher (Chip) Scanlan, director of
writing workshops for The Poynter Institute,
a journalism school in the United States, tells
the story of interviewing a woman who lost her
husband to cancer. She gave him a tour of her
home, and in the bedroom she said, “You know,
every night I put just a little of [my husband’s]
cologne on the pillow, so I can believe he is
still with me.” It’s a detail that the reader can
smell and feel, which Scanlan never would have
learned over the phone or online.
Telephone interviews take less time, and
some reporters find it easier to take good
notes when they don’t have to worry about
maintaining eye contact with the source. They
can even type their notes into the computer.
E-mail interviews are useful for reaching people

in distant places, but the reporter can’t listen to
what’s being said and follow up in “real time.”
Instant messaging via the Internet is more
akin to a telephone interview. But both online
methods raise the question of whether the
person they appear to be from actually sent
the answers.
Because of these concerns, The VirginianPilot newspaper in Norfolk, Virginia, has
instituted this newsroom policy for online
reporting: “In quoting from electronic
communications, we will make certain the
communication is genuine, as it is easy to fake
Internet return addresses or log on as someone
else. The Internet is not controlled like a wire
service [such as Reuters or the Associated
Press]; hoaxes can come from anywhere.”
Reporters using e-mail or other online
forms of communication should follow the
same professional standards as they would in
any other form. They must identify themselves
as journalists and tell what information they are
seeking and why. They need to apply the same
fact-checking and thinking skills they would to
any other source of information.
No matter which way they conduct
an interview, reporters usually have some
questions they save for the end. First, they may
summarize the conversation to be sure they’ve
heard accurately what was being said. Then
they will ask if there is anything else the person
being interviewed wants to add. They also
ask for the best way to get back in touch with
the person, especially after hours, and they
thank the person for his or her time. And
many journalists have one last question they
ask at all interviews, “Who else should I talk to
about this?”

Questions are

G ro un d Rul es

M

ost interviews are conducted “on the
record,” which means the reporter
can use anything that is said and
attribute it directly to the person who
is speaking. It is important to make sure the
source knows this, especially when the reporter
is dealing with ordinary people who are not
accustomed to being quoted in the newspaper
or on the air.
If the information is not to be on the record,
both the reporter and the source must agree
in advance to the conditions under which the
information can be used. An interview “on
background” or “not for attribution” generally
means the information can be used in a story
and the source’s words can be quoted directly,
although he or she cannot be named. However,
the source can be identified in a general way,
for example, as “a foreign ministry official” or “a
company engineer” — as long as the source and
the journalist both agree on the description to
be used.
Many news organizations have written
policies regarding the use of anonymous
sources. The New York Times newspaper,
for example, says: “The use of unidentified
sources is reserved for situations in which
the newspaper could not otherwise print
information it considers reliable and
newsworthy. When we use such sources, we
accept an obligation not only to convince a
reader of their reliability but also to convey
what we can learn of their motivation.”
Reporters should not be too quick to agree to
talk on background because sources sometimes
try to use it as a cover for a personal or partisan
attack, knowing it cannot be traced back to
them. And using an unnamed source makes it
more difficult for the audience to evaluate the
credibility of the information.

the backbone of
an inter view.
19

There are times when reporters have to get
information on background because it’s the
only way a source will agree to talk. A source
who fears for her safety if others learn that she
has spoken to a reporter may agree to provide
information only on background. Here are
some guidelines for deciding whether to accept
and use background information:
• Th
 e story is of overwhelming public concern.
• Th
 ere is no other way to get the information
on the record.
• Th
 e source is in a position to know the truth.
•Y
 ou are willing to explain (in your story) why
the source could not be named.
In some capitals, government officials will
talk to reporters on background as well as “deep
background,” which means the information
can be used but not in a direct quote, and the
source cannot be identified. A reporter could
write only that officials are known to believe
something or another. Information that is
offered “off the record” cannot be used at all,
so most reporters will fight this arrangement
unless the source is so important to the story
that they have no other choice. Off-the-record
information cannot even be repeated to
another source, but it can tip reporters off to a
story that is worth pursuing.
Whatever the arrangement, it’s up to the
reporter to make sure both sides understand
and agree to the ground rules before the
interview. Sometimes sources try to change
the rules in the middle, by telling the reporter
something important and then adding, “But
you can’t use that, of course.” That’s why it’s
a good idea to spell things out at the beginning,
and not to agree to withhold information unless
a separate deal is reached before proceeding
with the interview.

20

Credibility is a
j o u r n a l i s t ’s m o s t
important asset,
and accuracy is
the best way to
protect it.

Journalists also should be clear about
how far they will go to protect the identity of
a source. In some jurisdictions, journalists
may risk going to jail if they refuse to reveal
information about a confidential source in a
court of law. If a journalist is not willing to risk
facing time in prison to protect a source, he or
she should say so.
Some reporters are quite skilled at getting
off-the-record information back on the record.
Eric Nalder is one of them. When an off-therecord interview is over, he reads back a quote
that is quite innocuous and asks, “Why can’t
you say that on the record?” When the source
agrees, he goes on through his notes, reading
back quotes and getting them approved for
use. He says he once got an entire interview
changed from off the record to on. In part,
that’s because the source now trusted him to
be accurate because he had heard the quotes
read back.

One other ground rule that is important
for journalists to understand is the use of an
“embargo” on information provided by a source.
That means the information is provided on the
condition that it is not to be used until a specific
time. A government agency announcing a new
policy may provide a written summary several
hours in advance or even a day ahead. That
gives reporters time to digest the information
before the press conference making the policy
official. Reporters who accept information
under an embargo are bound to honor it
unless the news becomes public before the
specified time.

G e tting I t R ig ht

C

redibility is a journalist’s most important
asset, and accuracy is the best way to
protect it. To ensure accuracy, reporters
must check and double-check all of
the information they collect for a news story.
Reporters will make mistakes, but they should
be rare. When an American newspaper,
Portland’s Oregonian, studied its own errors,
editors concluded they happened mainly
because of three causes:
•W
 orking from memory;
•M
 aking assumptions;
•D
 ealing with second-hand sources.
We’ll talk more about getting it right in
Chapter 4 (“Editing the Story”). But reporters
are the news organization’s first line of defense
against errors. Reporters who take excellent
notes and consult them often, and who search
for primary sources whenever possible, are
better able to abide by the late American
publisher Joseph Pulitzer’s three rules of
journalism: “Accuracy, accuracy, and accuracy.”

21

3

22

T E L L I N G T H E S TO RY

All news stories are made up of facts, obser vations, quotations,
and details. Repor ters almost always have more than they
can use, and because they’ve worked hard to collect all of that
information, their natural impulse is to use as much of it as
possible in their stories. But cramming in all the facts that will fit
rarely results in a well-told stor y that will engage the audience.
It is harder to understand stories that are
overstuffed with information. A reporter who
tries to explain everything may succeed only in
confusing the audience. Besides, newspapers
have only so much space; radio and television
news programs only so much airtime; and
readers, listeners, and viewers only so much
spare time and attention to devote to catching
up on the news.
Good journalism involves selection, not
compression. Reporters must use their news
judgment to decide what is most important
to include in a story and in what order to put
it. For many reporters, the most difficult part
of telling a story is deciding what to leave out.
One way to make those decisions is to choose
a central point or a theme for the story, also
called a focus.

Fo cu s

T

he focus of a story is basically the answer
to the question, “What is this story really
about?” To determine the focus, Poynter
Institute writing instructor Chip Scanlan
suggests asking five additional questions:
• What’s the news?
• What’s the story?
• What’s the image?
• How can I tell it in six words?
• So what?
Imagine that you’re covering a fast-moving
wildfire. You’ve been out talking to people and
observing the damage all day. Now, you need

to focus your story before you begin writing.
Here’s how you might use Scanlan’s questions to
find your focus:
•W
 hat’s the news?
A fire destroyed two houses in the mountains
east of the city, but no one was injured and
the city business district was spared.
•W
 hat’s the story?
Two families are homeless but grateful to be
alive.
•W
 hat’s the image?
Family members hug each other near the
smoking ruins of their house.
•H
 ow can I tell it in six words or less?
Fire destroys homes but not spirits.
•S
 o what?
Property damage from a dangerous fire was
limited.
The reporter writing this story now knows
that his lead will be about the families who
lost their homes; that he’ll use a quote high up
in the story from a family member expressing
gratitude that everyone survived; and that he’ll
also include general information about property
damage. The reporter knows that he can leave
out some of the information he collected about
the number of fire companies that responded in
the business district, but he still might include a
quote from the fire chief.
The results of this focus exercise are not
meant to suggest that every story has only one
acceptable focus. On the contrary, reporters
for different news organizations may take the
same basic facts and write their stories quite
differently because they have decided on a
23

different focus. In the case of the wildfire story,
a reporter could use the same five questions to
come up with a different focus.
•W
 hat’s the news?
Businesses in our city escaped damage from
a wildfire that destroyed two houses in the
mountains east of downtown.
•W
 hat’s the story?
Business owners grateful the fire spared them
this time.
•W
 hat’s the image?
A business owner shakes hands with a
firefighter outside his store.
•H
 ow can I tell it in six words?
Fire can’t stop business.
•S
 o what?
Economic impact of a dangerous fire was
limited.
This version of the story would lead with
the relief of business owners, and use a quote
high up from one businessman whose store
was spared. Both stories would include the
same basic information — that two houses were
destroyed while businesses were unaffected
— but their emphasis would be different.
Knowing what to emphasize before beginning
to write helps the reporter decide what facts
and quotes to include and what to leave out. As
William Zinsser notes in his book On Writing
Well, “Clear thinking becomes clear writing;
one can’t exist without the other.”
Experienced reporters don’t wait until
the end of the day, after they’ve done all their
research, interviews, and observation, before
seeking a focus for their story. They may
actually start the reporting process with a focus
in mind, which helps them decide where to go
and whom to interview. Of course, the focus
can change as they collect more information,
and it often does. The most important thing is
for the reporter to have decided on a focus for
the story before sitting down to write.
Having a focus in mind is just the first
step in planning to write a story. The second
is to organize the story so you know what
information goes where. Begin by listing the
basic facts of the story and decide what should
be at the top, at the end, and in the middle.
24

Select the best quotes or sound bites from your
interviews, and decide where they should go in
the story. Make note of any details you want to
be sure to include. Before they begin to write,
some reporters find it useful to create an outline
on paper that they use as a kind of road map for
the story.

Writ in g

G

ood news writing is concise, clear, and
accurate. That sounds simple enough,
but it’s actually quite challenging. As
we’ve already mentioned, reporters have
a tendency to want to include everything they
have learned in their stories. But stories that
get to the point are more likely to appeal to busy
news consumers, and a news organization that
lets stories run on won’t have much space or
time left to cover other news.
Generally speaking, news stories have
shorter sentences and paragraphs than most
other types of writing. Each paragraph contains
one main idea. A new paragraph begins when a
new idea, character, or setting is introduced.
Journalists use simple, direct language that
is easy to understand, with more nouns and
verbs than adjectives and adverbs. Well-written
news stories are not vague, ambiguous, or
repetitious, because every word counts. As E.B.
White notes in his classic book, The Elements of
Style, one of the basic rules of writing is simply
this: “Omit needless words.”
Good writers always make an effort to
choose the most appropriate word to convey
what they mean. As the 19th-century
American writer Mark Twain said, “The
difference between the right word and almost
the right word is the difference between
lightning and the lightning bug.” Reporters
routinely consult dictionaries and reference
books to make sure the words they choose
really mean what they think they do.
Because they write stories for a general
audience, journalists also try to avoid jargon
— specialized language or technical terms
unfamiliar to most people. A hospital
spokesman might describe a person as suffering

Good news writing
i s c o n c i s e , c l e a r,
and accurate.

from “lacerations and contusions,” but a
reporter should use simpler terms: “cuts and
bruises.” If a technical term must be used for
accuracy, it’s a good idea to include a definition
as well. For example, the term “fossil fuels”
in a story about global energy issues should
include a short list of what those fuels are: coal,
oil, and natural gas. Journalists also must steer
clear of euphemisms — words or phrases that
may confuse or mislead the audience. If the
city council votes to approve “a new interment
facility,” the story on the radio or in the next
day’s newspaper should tell residents that the
city “plans to build a new cemetery.”
One key principle of news writing is to
show the audience what happened rather than
just telling them about it. For example, instead
of saying that family members attending a
funeral were grief-stricken, a well-written news
story would show their grief by describing how
they hugged each other and sobbed. Instead
of just telling the reader that a person is tall, a
good writer would mention that he has to stoop
to enter the front door.
Accuracy is critically important in news
writing. An accurate story gets the basics
right: grammar, spelling, punctuation, dates,
addresses, numbers, and all the other details
that go into a news story. Getting someone’s
name or age wrong is the kind of error that can
erode a journalist’s credibility. An accurate
story also tells a complete story, not just one
side or another. That doesn’t mean that any
single story should include everything there
is to say about a topic, but it does mean that
reporters must not leave out key information
that could distort the story’s meaning. For
example, writing that a new test makes it easier
to detect oral cancer suggests that the old test

was unreliable. If the new test is merely faster,
the reporter should say so. We’ll talk at greater
length about accuracy in Chapter 4, “Editing
the Story.”

Lea d s

T

he beginning of a news story is known as
the lead. It is meant to capture attention
and to draw the reader, listener, or viewer
into the story. There are two basic types
of leads: hard and soft. A hard lead summarizes
the essential facts of the story — the five Ws
and an H discussed in Chapter 2 — while a soft
lead may set the scene or introduce a character.
Another way to look at the difference between
these types of leads is to consider a hard lead as
the answer to the question, “What’s the news?”
and a soft lead as the answer to the question,
“What’s the story?”
Either type of lead can be used for a hardnews story. For example, a story about the
election of a new prime minister could be
written one of several different ways. A hard
lead might read like this:
Former rebel leader Joshua Smith was elected
prime minister tonight, winning more than
80 percent of the vote in the country’s first
democratic election since 1993.
A soft lead would take a different approach:
Growing up in Youngtown, Joshua Smith was
a little boy with big dreams. Always small
for his age, he says the bigger boys at school
bullied him. When he told his grammar
school teacher he’d be prime minister some
day, she laughed.
No one is laughing now. Smith won
yesterday’s election with more than 80
percent of the vote, becoming the country’s
first democratically elected leader since 1993.
As you can see, a hard lead tends to be
shorter than a soft lead — often only one
sentence long. While soft leads can be longer,
every sentence in the lead supports the main
point of the story. And both leads include the
most newsworthy elements of the story.
25

Choosing the right kind of lead depends
on many factors, including the importance
and timing of the story and the type of news
organization, publication, or broadcast
involved. Wire services, online-news sites,
and radio newscasts that thrive on immediacy
generally use hard leads. A weekly news
program or magazine is more likely to use a
soft lead, on the assumption that most of the
audience already would know the central facts
of the story.
The most common type of soft lead is the
anecdotal lead, similar to the example used in
the prime minister story. An anecdote is, by
definition, a brief tale; when used as a lead it
illustrates or foreshadows the larger story. A
story about a social trend might begin with
several related anecdotes or examples. On rare
occasions, a quotation or a question may be the
best way to begin a story. All of these leads also
can be described as “delayed” leads, because the
reader has to wait for several sentences to find
out what the story is really about.

Sto r y Str u c tu re

A

ll stories have a structure in the same
way that people have a spine, or, at
least, they should! Without a structure,
stories would be a jumble of facts with
nothing to hold them together. Structure
is essential for stories to be understandable
and meaningful, but not all stories should be
structured in the same way. Good writers
choose the most suitable shape for the story
they are telling.

Inverted Pyramid
Many news stories begin with
the most newsworthy information,
following a traditional story structure
developed more than 100 years ago. The
“inverted pyramid” form puts the most
important information at the top, followed
by other information in descending order
of importance. This shape is useful when
reporting important or breaking news, when
timeliness is of the essence. If you are the first
26

to report a significant development, you’ll want
to tell the audience what has happened right
at the top of your story. A report on a massive
storm, for example, likely would begin with
the death toll and the location of the heaviest
damage. Writers who resist using this structure
when it is called for may be accused of “burying
the lead,” making it more difficult for the
audience to determine the story’s importance.
In the inverted-pyramid structure,
information following the lead expands or
develops the point that is made in the lead. In
the case of the storm report, the writer might
describe the scene of the worst devastation,
and then include a quote from a survivor or
an emergency worker. Supporting paragraphs
would elaborate on the topic, filling in details
and providing background on the storm.
In a longer story, a reporter might include
secondary information that is related to the
primary theme but not directly. The storm
story, for example, could include information
about international relief efforts, and the needs
of survivors, both immediate and long term.
One reason for the popularity of this structure
is that editors can cut from the bottom to save
space and time without worrying about cutting
vital information.

Hourglass
A modified form of the inverted
pyramid is known as the “hourglass”
structure. It begins, in a similar
fashion, with the most important
information — but after a few
paragraphs it takes a turn and becomes a
narrative, usually told in chronological order.
Sticking with the example of the story about
the massive storm, a reporter could start
with a hard lead, provide a few paragraphs of
support, and then tell the story of the storm as
witnessed by one survivor. This kind of story
form requires a clear transition between the
opening section and the narrative. A reporter
might write something like, “Farmer Iqbal
Khan was in his barn when the wind kicked
up …” to begin the bottom half of an hourglass
story. Some stories are written in a purely

chronological form, but this structure is most
often used for features.

Diamond
Still another story form is the
“diamond” structure. A reporter
using this structure would begin
with an anecdote, introducing a
character whose experience illustrates
what the story is all about. This small story
would then broaden out to show its wider
significance. Toward the end, the reporter
would return to the individual character’s story
as a way of concluding the narrative.
Reporters using this structure often use a
device known as a “nut” paragraph (or nut graph)
to explain why the story matters — the word
“nut” signifying the hard center of the story. Jack
Hart, managing editor of Portland’s Oregonian
newspaper, says nut graphs “can answer any
questions raised in leads, explain why stories
are significant, and place stories in meaningful
contexts.” The nut graph needs to be early
enough in the story to make clear to the reader
why he or she should bother to keep reading.
The diamond form is frequently used in
television news and newspaper reports. For
example, a reporter might begin a story about a
new AIDS treatment by introducing a patient
who needs the treatment, then describe the
experimental drug and how it works, and
conclude by noting that doctors give the patient
we met earlier only a limited time to live if the
new treatment is not effective. Whatever form
you choose, the middle of the story should keep
the audience engaged and interested. Good
writing, a magazine editor once said, makes the
reader want to find out what happens next.
End ing s

U

nless you are using the traditional
inverted pyramid style and you expect
the bottom of your story to be trimmed
by an editor, it’s a good idea to have
an ending in mind when you begin writing,
much as it is helpful to have a destination in
mind when you set out on a journey. This

is particularly important in broadcast news
because of the way it’s presented. Unlike print
or online news, broadcast news is linear — the
audience can’t choose the order in which
they’ll receive the information — and research
has found that viewers and listeners tend to
remember best what they hear last. For that
reason, many broadcast stories conclude with
a summary ending, reinforcing the story’s main
point.
Endings often echo beginnings, in that they
return to an important place or a person. In
a chronological narrative, the ending is what
happens last. If a story has raised a problem,
the ending might offer a solution. Endings
frequently look toward the future, to what
might happen next. And occasionally a story
may end with a strong quote or a sound bite.
This is rarely justified, however, and should be
used only when the quote is so powerful that
writing anything more would be a letdown for
the audience.

At t ribut io n

A

key difference between a news story
and an editorial or opinion column
is the use of attribution. Attribution
simply answers the question, “Who
says?” It identifies the source of the information
reported, particularly any controversial
statements or questionable information.
Attribution can be explicit or implied.
Here’s an example of explicit or direct
attribution: “The man was arrested and charged
with murder, police sergeant Antonio Costa
said.” Rewritten, using implied or indirect
attribution, the sentence would read, “Police
arrested the man and charged him with
murder.” In both cases, the audience can tell
that the source of the information is the police.
One major reason to attribute information
in most news stories is to allow readers,
listeners, and viewers to decide for themselves
whether to believe it. For example, a report
that North Korea has decided to suspend its
nuclear program could be seen as more or less
credible by some audiences, depending on who
27

is quoted as saying so: a visiting Chinese official
or an international team of scientists.
Another reason for attribution is to place
responsibility for a controversial statement
where it belongs, with the person who said it,
not with the reporter or the news organization.
This does not imply immunity from lawsuits, as
legal protections vary from country to country.
But it is good journalistic practice to make clear
who is making allegations or taking a particular
stand.
Not all information in a news story needs
to be attributed, however. Naming the source
of every bit of information would make stories
almost incomprehensible. Information that
a reporter observed directly can be stated
without attribution. Indisputable or wellaccepted facts do not need to be attributed,
either. For example, a reporter could say which
team won a soccer match without attribution
because the final score would not be in doubt.
But writing that one candidate won a political
debate would need to be attributed, or it would
cross the line from fact into opinion.

Q uo te s a nd S ou n d B i te s

N

ews stories are told primarily in the
reporter’s words, but most stories also
include the words of other people,
in quotations or sound bites. When
used effectively, quotes make stories stronger
by sharing the direct experience of someone
involved. Using a quote up high in a story
can make it more interesting to the audience,
because quotes provide a personal connection
to the story.
By definition, a quotation must be
attributed so the audience knows who said
it. Direct quotes are at least one sentence
long and are in the exact words of the speaker.
They’re used when most of what a speaker said
is worth repeating. Partial quotes, primarily
used in print, can be just a word or a phrase
the speaker said, which are used when the full
sentence may be confusing or too long. The
reporter has the responsibility of putting partial
quotes into context so the meaning of what the

28

speaker said is unchanged. For example, when
French President Jacques Chirac addressed his
country after weeks of social unrest, he said:
“We will build nothing lasting without fighting
discrimination, which is a poison for society.”
Some reporters used that full, direct quote
in their stories. But in London’s Guardian
newspaper, only one word of the quote
appeared in the lead paragraph: “Jacques Chirac
… launched an appeal to combat the ‘poison’ of
racial discrimination.”
It’s never worth quoting everything
someone says in an interview. But how do you
choose what to quote directly? The basic rule
is simple: Don’t use a direct quote or sound
bite if you can say it better yourself. Too many
news stories are stuffed full of quotes that fail
this test, most of which come out of the mouths
of officials. Avoid quotes that merely state
facts, especially in bureaucratic language. Who
needs to hear the mayor say, “We expect to
have a decision next week on contingency plans
for the distribution of municipal funds to lowincome recipients”? That kind of information
would be much better paraphrased, that is,
rewritten in clear, concise language by the
reporter. In this case, the reporter might have
written, “It will be at least a week before people
can expect to get any money from the city,
according to the mayor.”
The best quotes are subjective, adding
insight and perspective to stories. They use
colorful language and reflect on personal
experience or expert knowledge. They have
passion, says television investigative reporter
Tony Kovaleski. “During interviews, try and
capture the passion,” he says. “During writing,
make sure not to miss it.” One good rule of
thumb is to use quotes that sound authentic,
not as if they have been read from a script.
Once you’ve chosen the best quotes, build
your story around them. But reporter Bob
Dotson, with U.S. television network NBC,
warns, “Don’t use sound bites as substitutes for
more effective story telling.” Reporters who
simply string quotes or sound bites together
often are taking the lazy way out.

Nu m be r s

A

journalism teacher once described her
students as “do-gooders who hate math.”
Most journalists will never come to
love mathematics, but they need it, and
they need to know why. Numbers may look
solid and factual, but they are not infallible.
Journalists need numerical competence
in order to tell the difference between a
meaningless number and a significant one, or
they risk writing stories that are misleading and
confusing, at best, and, at worst, flat out wrong.
Journalists need mathematical intuition so
they can tell when the numbers they’re looking
at just don’t add up. They need math mechanics
to find the meaning behind figures and data.
They need mathematical concepts so they can
understand banking and business, bankruptcy
and boom times. Simply put, journalists need
mathematics skills to make sense of numbers
the way they need language skills to make sense
of words.
Competent journalists are both capable and
careful with numbers. They’re quick to spot
an implausible number, and they have a basic
working knowledge of arithmetic and statistics
so they can confirm their suspicions. They
know how to calculate percentages, ratios, rates
of change, and other relationships between
numbers that tell far better stories than raw

data can. They can and should translate
numbers into terms that readers and viewers
can easily understand.
Journalists with numerical competence
are more important than ever in today’s highly
technical world. They are the writers and
editors who can assess and explain scientific,
medical, technological, and economic
developments. They are the journalists who
can find stories in databases by crunching
numbers themselves, instead of waiting for
someone with a vested interest to do it for
them.
Once the numbers have been checked and
rechecked, the reporter has to decide how to
use them in a story. The rule of thumb is: The
fewer numbers, the better. Numbers should
be rounded off for simplicity’s sake, and put
in context for clarity. “A number has little
significance on its own,” says Paul Hemp, author
of Ten Practical Tips for Business and Economic
Reporting in Developing Economies. “Its true
meaning comes from its relative value.” So a
story about an increase in school spending
might translate the raw numbers into the
additional amount that will be spent per child.
A story about the number of people who die of
lung cancer every year might note that it is the
equivalent of a jumbo jet crashing every day.
Journalists who fail to master mathematics
lack a basic skill needed to decipher much of
the information in the world around them, such
as crime statistics, pollution standards, and
unemployment figures. Without mathematics
skills appropriate to their beat, journalists are
bound to fall short in their quest for accuracy.

29

4

30

E D I T I N G T H E S TO RY

It’s nine o’clock in the morning, and the editorial meeting in
the newsroom begins with a discussion of the stories ever yone
is working on for that day. Some repor ters and photographers
already have assignments and are out covering today ’s news. A
few got their assignments last night; others were sent out early
this morning after a conference call involving
top news managers. Reporters who do not have
assigned stories yet “pitch” their story ideas at
the meeting, seeking a manager’s approval to
produce that story for tonight’s newscast or
tomorrow’s newspaper. The assignment editor
runs through a list of scheduled events that may
or may not merit coverage. Once the decisions
are made, the managers put together a “budget,”
or line-up of stories that they hope will soon be
available for publication or broadcast.
At that point, you might think the managers
could sit back and relax. But no decision
in a newsroom is ever set in stone. Almost
inevitably, plans change. News will happen that
was not anticipated, and stories will be dropped
because they didn’t turn out as expected.
Others will require more reporting and won’t
be completed today. Deciding what to run,
what to drop, and what to hold is the job of the
news managers, the editors, and producers.
They will choose and change the stories of
the day based on importance, interest, new
developments, and the time or space available.
But the editor’s job still isn’t done. Before the
newspaper goes to press or the broadcast hits
the air, editors have another critical role to play.
It’s their job to ensure that the stories presented
to the public are well written and presented, as
well as accurate, complete, and fair.
Most newsrooms have more than one editor.
No single person could handle the volume of
stories produced by most news organizations
every day. In large newsrooms, there may be
several layers of editors, who ultimately report

to the person in charge of the news division, the
chief newspaper editor or the broadcast news
director. As you will see, the editor’s job calls
for a variety of skills, a high degree of literacy, as
well as the ability to handle a changing agenda
and work relentlessly under pressure.

Newspa per J o bs

A

typical daily newspaper has a staff
of reporters who cover a wide range
of news. Most of the reporters at a
local newspaper usually work for the
“city” or “metro” desk, covering stories in the
community the newspaper serves. A large
newspaper with national circulation adds
national and international or foreign desks,
with reporters based in the nation’s capital and
in other countries. Some reporters work for
specialized sections of the newspaper, covering
sports, business, or features. Each of these
desks or sections is headed by an editor, who
oversees the reporters’ work and who may be
assisted by one or more sub-editors.
Newspaper editors assign the stories,
they edit the written text or “copy,” and they
supervise the design and layout of pages. In
most large newspapers, editors specialize in just
one of these tasks, but at smaller newspapers,
one person may handle them all. In addition,
newspapers may have a photo editor who
oversees a staff of photographers, as well as
a graphics editor who supervises the work
of artists creating maps, charts, and other
informational graphics. Large newspapers also
31

Editors need to be

have a staff of researchers who help reporters
find background on stories and who maintain a
library, or “morgue,” of stories published by the
newspaper.

strong journalists
and newsroom

Bro ad c a st J obs

B

roadcast newsrooms are not organized
like newspapers. Most broadcast
reporters do not specialize in covering a
particular type of story, but may instead
be assigned to specific news broadcasts like
the early morning news or the late night news.
Each of these broadcasts is put together by a
producer, who decides what stories will air,
at what length, and in what order. In larger
newsrooms, an executive producer supervises
the work of the producers.
In addition to reporters, broadcast
newsrooms have presenters or “anchors” who
appear on the air and introduce the stories the
reporters have covered that day. Radio and
television anchors usually appear on more than
one newscast per day.
The title of editor in a television newsroom
sometimes is given to the person charged with
the technical production of news stories, the
one who cuts the video and sound together to
make the finished product that goes on the air.
In many newsrooms, the photojournalist who
shot the video does the cutting, working with a
script written and voiced by the reporter.

The Ed itor ’s R ol e

A

recent job listing for an editor at a
small newspaper read, “This person
should have strong writing, editing,
and layout skills. … He or she should be
accurate, responsible, able to work well within
a team atmosphere, and possess supervisory
skills.” A large television station seeking to
hire a new producer asked for “expert news
judgment … superior writing skills … must
have management skills, must be multi-task
oriented, and well organized.”

32

leaders.
As you can see, editors need to be strong
journalists and newsroom leaders. They are
involved in the news process from beginning
to end. Editors need good news judgment
because they serve as assignment managers,
responsible for deciding what stories will be
covered and by whom. They must be good
writers in order to help to shape the story as it
is developing, discussing it with reporters in the
field and deciding where to deploy more people
to cover additional angles. Editors are directly
involved in decisions about story presentation,
writing or choosing headlines, captions, photos,
and illustrations. And they must lead and
motivate the employees who report to them.
Editors and producers work closely with
reporters, discussing and reviewing their
stories. Newspaper editors check copy, choose
illustrations — either graphics or photos — and
decide how the story will be laid out on the
page as well as the headline. In most broadcast
newsrooms, reporters do not record their
scripts or assemble their stories until a producer
has approved the content. Producers also
decide the order of stories in the newscast and
the amount of time to be allocated to each story.

Co py Ed it in g

E

ditors serve as a second set of eyes
looking for any errors in a story. The
emphasis here is on a second set of eyes.
That’s because reporters should always
check their own copy for accuracy before
submitting it to an editor. A first draft is a good
start, but that’s all it is. Every writer should
allow some time for revising his or her own
copy. Good writing, by definition, requires
rewriting.

An accuracy check is the first level of copyediting. Editors look for grammatical and usage
errors, as well as for spelling mistakes. They pay
particular attention to subject-verb agreement
and subject-pronoun agreement. Editors make
sure that all numbers in a story are correct:
addresses, telephone numbers, ages, date, and
time references. They rework any calculations
the reporter may have performed to make sure
the math is correct. They confirm that the
reporter has used proper titles for everyone
who is quoted, and they review the use of
attribution throughout the story.
Editors also look closely for any errors of
fact or issues of fairness. Thorough editors read
stories with a skeptical eye, with questions like
these in mind:
•H
 ow does the reporter know this?
•W
 hy should the audience believe this?
• I s the main point of the story supported?
•A
 re the quotes accurate, and do they capture
what the person really meant?
•A
 re all sides represented?
• I s something missing?
• I s the story fair?
Editors also pay attention to matters of
taste and language, which vary depending on
the local culture. (We’ll talk more about that
in Chapter 7, “Ethics and Law.”) Editors and
reporters alike should read copy out loud —
especially in broadcast newsrooms — listening
for sentences that are too long, redundancies,
awkward phrases, and double meanings. In
many newsrooms, editors have the authority to
change a reporter’s copy without consultation
to fix these kinds of basic problems.
Editors are not simply proofreaders,
however. They are journalists in every sense of
the word. Most editors and producers either
have reporting experience or reporting skills.
So when they read a reporter’s story, they are
looking for much more than basic accuracy.
They want to know if a story would make sense
to someone who knows nothing about the
subject. They’re mindful of the need to make
stories engaging and interesting.

If a story falls short, the editor or producer
must be able to work with the reporter to
improve the final product. That’s when their
leadership skills come into play, as they use a
process commonly called “coaching.”

Co a ch in g

C

oaching is a way for editors to help
reporters solve a story’s problems
independently. It avoids the resentment
reporters often feel when an editor fixes
problems by rewriting their stories. And it
helps reporters learn how to do better work,
rather than repeating the same mistakes and
letting the editor step in and fix them. “A
good editor coaches reporters through talking
to them while they report and write,” says
Joyce Bazira, a news editor at the Tanzanian
newspaper Alasiri. “Through coaching, writers
can also … discuss the problems they are
encountering in doing their assignments, with
the editor trying to solve them.”
The skills involved in coaching are some
of the same skills that distinguish a good
journalist: listening attentively and asking good
questions. Coaching works because reporters
generally know the problems they are having
with a story, even if they can’t quite decide what
to do about them. The job of the coach is to
ask questions and listen, and help the reporter
improve the work. That’s quite different from
the “fixer” role that some editors play:
33

COACH
Helps the writer;
Helps throughout the
process;
Develops the writer;
Builds on strengths;
Fosters independence;
Shares control.

FIXER
Fixes the story;
Fixes on deadline;
Undercuts the writer;
Exposes weaknesses;
Creates resentment;
Takes control.

Many editors resist coaching reporters
because they think it takes too much time.
They believe it’s faster to make the changes
themselves. When the deadline looms,
coaching may be impractical. The newspaper
must be printed on time, the newscast must go
on the air, and mistakes cannot be allowed to
go through. But in newsrooms committed to
coaching, editors don’t wait until the last minute
to check a reporter’s copy. By working with
reporters throughout the process, editors help
reporters produce better stories that require
less editing time at the end of the process.
Botswanan journalist Rodrick Mukumbira,
currently with the Ngami Times, says he
considers coaching a central part of his job as a
news editor. “An editor should not only assign
a reporter and correct mistakes in the final
draft,” Mukumbira says. “He should intervene
in the reporting process — when the reporter is
struggling with the lead — to save time on the
final article.”
A coaching editor will talk to reporters
before they leave the newsroom, when they call
in from the field, and as soon as they return,
before they begin to write. The coaching editor
asks simple questions that can help the reporter
focus the story, such as:
•W
 hat happened?
•W
 hat is your story really about?
•W
 hat does the audience need to know?
•H
 ow can you make this clear?
•W
 hat do you think of your story so far?
•W
 hat needs work?
•W
 hat do you need to do next?
•H
 ow can I help you?

34

Editors who coach always look for
something to praise and encourage in every
story, and when they point out problems they
focus on only a few at a time. The Poynter
Institute’s Jill Geisler says that when she
coaches, she sits on her hands. As a coach, she
does not want to touch the reporter’s copy but
rather to let the reporter talk about the story so
she can listen for clarity and raise questions the
writer needs to answer.
Coaching creates sharper journalism in a
more humane newsroom. It makes dialogue
a reward, not a punishment. And because
people remember what they practice, coaching
ultimately helps journalists do better work.

Hea d l in es, Ca pt io n s, a n d Tea ses

B

esides editing reporters’ stories, editors
are responsible for additional material
that accompanies the stories. In
newspapers and online newsrooms,
editors write headlines for stories and captions
for photos. A headline is both a summary and
an advertisement. It gives the audience a quick
idea of what the story is about, and tells readers
why they should be interested in reading the
entire piece. A caption is more of a label, telling
readers what the photograph or graphic shows.
In broadcast newsrooms, producers may write
headlines and also what are called teases,
short descriptions of stories designed to make
listeners or viewers want to stay tuned to get
the full report.
Headlines, by definition, are short and
catchy. A print headline summarizes the story,
gets the reader’s attention, helps to organize the
news on the printed page, and, through the use
of different sizes of type, indicates the relative
importance of each story. When writing a
headline, the editor simply does not compress
the lead paragraph into just a few words. Good
editors try to capture the central point of the
story in the headline, so they need to understand
a story fully before trying to write a headline.
The editor has to read the story from beginning
to end, and look at the photographs and graphics
that will accompany the story. If the main point

Headlines, by
definition, are
shor t and catchy.
isn’t obvious, the editor should consult with the
reporter rather than guess and risk printing a
headline that is misleading or wrong. Besides, a
confused editor is one indication that the story
probably needs more work.
The language in headlines should be simple
and straightforward. Use proper names and
present tense. It’s generally acceptable not to
use conjunctions — articles like “the” — and to
drop linking verbs like “is” or “were.” A story
that tells how a woman and her boyfriend
were arrested for a string of bank robberies
might be headlined: “Bandit, Boyfriend Held
in Robberies.” But avoid what editors call
“headlinese,” verbs that appeal to headline
writers just because they are short. Verbs like
“probe,” “eye,” “nab,” “vie,” and “huddle” almost
never are used in conversation, so they don’t
belong in headlines.
A headline should match the tone of the
story. Hard news stories demand a straight
summary, like this headline from The Zimbabwe
Independent newspaper, “Smugglers Dent
Zimbabwe’s Gold Production.” The headline
makes sure the reader knows exactly what the
story is about. Feature headlines, on the other
hand, may only hint at the story’s content, since
they are written primarily to pique the reader’s
curiosity. For example, Argentina’s Buenos Aires
Herald ran this headline over a review of a new
recording: “Sassy Madonna Goes Back in Time.”
Because headlines have to fit in a restricted
amount of space, the newspaper editor creates
headlines the way you would build a jigsaw
puzzle. The copy editor for an American
newspaper — the Newark Star-Ledger
— Joel Pisetzner, says, “I put words together
like assembling a kidnap note. Scramble,
rescramble, mix and match.” While it can be
fun, editors say it’s important to always keep

the reader in mind. Avoid trite or overused
expressions and be extremely careful with
puns or double meanings. Headlines that try
too hard to be funny, clever, or gripping often
fail. Above all, headlines must be accurate and
honest, not misleading. What is in the headline
must be in the story. Nothing annoys a reader
more than a story that doesn’t deliver what the
headline promised.
Much like a headline, a broadcast tease is
designed to draw the viewer’s attention to the
rest of the story. Teases are subject to many of
the same rules as headlines. Producers must
watch the story and talk to the reporter before
writing a tease. Trite and clever don’t work in
teases any more than they do in headlines. And
teases should not over-promise or over-sell the
content of the story that follows.
Unlike a newspaper headline, the broadcast
tease is written in complete sentences. It stands
alone, separated from the story by other news
or advertising content. A tease usually does
not summarize the story the way a headline
would, since its goal is to make the viewer
want to stay tuned in order to learn more.
Instead, producers write teases that leave some
questions unanswered, or they may create
anticipation by promising to deliver a benefit to
the viewer who keeps watching.
To illustrate the difference, consider the
lead of this story from an American newspaper,
the Los Angeles Times, reported from Amman,
Jordan: “An Iraqi woman appeared on Jordanian
state television Sunday and confessed to being
the fourth member of an al-Qaida suicide
bomber team that attacked three hotels here
last week, killing 57 people.” The newspaper
headlined the story: “Iraqi Woman Calmly
Confesses How She Tried to Blow Up Hotel.”
But the tease for that same story on the NBC
Nightly News on television was this: “Who is
she? And why did she agree to be the fourth
would-be hotel suicide bomber in Jordan? New
details tonight.” The television tease did not
mention the woman’s confession, but instead
promised to answer the viewer’s questions
about her role.
35

Photo captions also have a different purpose
from headlines. Instead of summarizing
content the way a headline does, a caption
helps the reader appreciate what’s inside the
visual frame. The photograph and caption
together form a small story that the reader can
understand without having to read the text of
the story that accompanies it.
Captions should clearly identify the main
people in a photograph. If several people are
featured, it’s often helpful to let the reader know
that the central character is the one “wearing a
cap” or “standing on the right.” Captions should
not repeat the exact wording of the headline
or lift a sentence directly from the story. And
caption writers don’t need to spell out what can
be seen clearly in the photo. “Carlos Fernández
smiles as he gets off the plane” is a less effective
caption than: “A jubilant Carlos Fernández
returns from 15 years in exile.”
Most captions are short, just one or
two lines in small type. But on occasion, a
newspaper or online site will carry multiple
photographs with longer captions in a photo
essay that tells a complete story. Longer
captions can use quotations from the people
pictured.

G raphic s a nd Vi s u al s

N

ewspaper reporters sometimes resent
the use of graphics because they take up
space, forcing stories to be shorter. But
good graphics add to the visual appeal
of the newspaper, attract readers’ attention, and
make stories more understandable. They help
reporters’ stories, rather than take away from
them. As newspaper designer Ron Reason puts
it, graphics are “information, not decoration.”

Every graphic must have a purpose. Filling
empty space or airtime is not a sufficient
reason for using a graphic. A graphic should
enhance the reader or viewer’s understanding
of the story, which means the editor must
fully understand the story before designing or
choosing a graphic to go along with it. Graphic
artists usually produce the visual images;
the role of the editor is to conceptualize the
graphic, find the information it should contain
or illustrate, and ascertain its accuracy.
Graphics can convey basic facts or illustrate
a process. Imagine you are reporting on air
pollution in your country. A map could be
used to show where the air is most unhealthy.
An illustration could be used to show how
air pollution affects the lungs. Both types of
graphics work just as well for broadcast as they
do for print.
Whatever the medium, avoid graphics that
are crammed with too much information. The
reader or viewer should be able to look at the
graphic and take away one basic idea. Think of
a graphic as a highway sign — the driver doesn’t
get a chance to study it because things are going
by too fast, so the information has to be clear
and easily absorbed.
Let’s imagine you have a story that says the
city’s annual budget is twice as large as it was 10
years ago. Reading closely, you notice that most
of the growth has been in the last three years.
A bar graph charting the size of the budget for
each of the last 10 years would be an easy way
to make that clear.
45
40
35
30
25
20
15
10
5
0

1995

1997

1999

2001

Budget (in millions)

36

2003

2005

It is easier for readers and viewers to absorb
information presented with shapes rather than
raw numbers. For example, in a story about
your city’s business development crowding
out residents, you could list the number of
apartments and office buildings in the area.
However, it would be more effective to create
a pie chart showing the relationship between
the two. Compare rates whenever possible,
not raw numbers. It is misleading to show
that one town has twice as many deaths from
AIDS as another, when the first town has 10
times as many inhabitants. Calculate the rate
of deaths per inhabitant so you can make a fair
comparison. Editors who work with graphics
need a grasp of statistics and a commitment to
employ them transparently and accurately to
enhance understanding.

Supe r v ising

A

s we’ve already noted, editors are
supervisors as well as journalists. As
they work with reporters on daily
stories, they also oversee their progress
over the long term. They look for opportunities
— either in person or on paper — to provide
constructive feedback that will help reporters
improve their work. Many editors also are
responsible for annual performance reviews of
the employees they supervise, which is a more
formal type of feedback.
Effective feedback is timely and specific. It
is provided both in person and in writing. And
most editors believe in providing some positive
feedback in public but keeping all critical
comments private. For most busy editors, the
only way to ensure that their employees get
the one-on-one feedback they deserve is to
schedule regular feedback sessions. Letting
employees know how they are doing on a
routine basis is a good way to avoid unpleasant
surprises at performance-review time.

News managers should find a way to get
honest feedback from the staff on their own
performance. This can be done through
informal conversations or by asking employees
to fill out an anonymous questionnaire. Either
way, it’s important for managers to stress that
they want people to be candid, and to avoid
bearing grudges if the results are not entirely
favorable. The point is for them to learn how
they’re doing so they can improve their own
performance.
Top editors and news directors set the tone
for the newsroom and help to create a positive
newsroom culture, establishing and reinforcing
the norms and values that employees share.
In a well-managed newsroom, editors avoid
playing favorites. They encourage open
communication and hold regular meetings
to make sure everyone understands the goals
of the news organization. Editors should pay
close attention to staff morale, and do what
they can to bolster it by celebrating successes
and rewarding outstanding achievement.
Recognizing good work in a public setting is
one way to get more of it.

37

5

38

B R OA D C A S T A N D O N L I N E

Radio, television, and online — or Web -based — journalism
are specialized forms with demands and requirements over and
above those we have discussed so far. Broadcast journalists use
not only words, but also sound and video in construc ting their
stories. What they write must be written to be heard, not read,
by the audience. Like their TV counterparts,
online journalists can include sound and video
in their stories, as well as interactive elements
that allow a reader to explore the story at his or
her own pace.
For simplicity’s sake, we’ll use the term
broadcast in this chapter to describe all radio
and television news, whether it’s transmitted
over the air, on cable, or via satellite.

Broa d c a st Sto r y Fo r ms an d Te r ms

T

he basic broadcast story forms are the
“tell” or “reader” story, the “V/O” or voice
over, and the “wrap” or “package.” A
“reader” story is just what it appears to
be — a story without additional sound bites or
video — usually presented by the newscaster
or anchor in the studio. A “V/O” is a television
term for a story told with video but no “sound
bites,” the broadcast term in English for direct
quotes. The newsreader or anchor will read the
script for the story while the video is playing.
Adding a sound bite turns a V/O into a “V/
O-SOT,” shorthand for sound on tape. Even
though many stations now capture all video
digitally without using tape, the abbreviation
SOT appears to have stuck. These story
forms — reader, V/O, and V/O-SOT — tend
to be short: usually less than a minute, and
sometimes only 10 or 15 seconds long.

A complete story by a reporter is called
a “wrap” in radio and a “package” in television
news parlance. It consists of the reporter’s
narration, also called “track,” and often includes
sound bites and natural sound, sound that
occurs naturally on location. Obviously, the
television version has video, which may include
graphics, either static or animated. These types
of stories can be presented live or recorded in
advance, and they tend to run longer than the
other story forms — sometimes up to six or
seven minutes, depending on the format of the
newscast. Each package also has a “lead-in,”
or introduction, to be read by the newscaster.
Many also include a “tag,” which provides
additional information at the end of the
reporter’s package.
Another type of broadcast story is known as
a “natural sound” or “NATSOT” package. This
story form is most often used in television but
occasionally in radio as well. It does not include
any reporter track. Instead, the people featured
in the story have to provide the narration. This
approach can require more planning and just
as much reporting as any other story, but the
results can be powerful. Photojournalists, who
sometimes produce this type of story on their
own without a reporter, have to make sure that
every bit of information needed to tell the story
is captured on tape or else the final product
won’t make sense.

39

Radio and
television stories
are written for the
l i s t e n e r ’s e a r.

Bro ad c a st Wr iti n g

R

adio and television stories are written
for the listener’s ear, not the reader’s
eye. Reporters must write copy they can
read out loud: clear, conversational copy
that is easily understood. Unlike newspaper
or online readers, the broadcast audience can’t
go back and take a second look or listen to a
story that didn’t quite make sense the first time.
“The words are spoken and, once spoken, are
irretrievable,” former CBS (U.S. TV network)
News editor Ed Bliss once wrote.
Broadcast journalists are more concise than
their newspaper colleagues. They have to be.
The printout of a half-hour news broadcast
would fill only a page or two in the newspaper.
A broadcast lead cannot include all 5 Ws
and the H discussed in Chapter 2 — it would
be too long and too hard to follow. Instead,
a broadcast writer will select the two or three
most significant points to use in the lead,
and put the rest in the sentence that follows.
Broadcast stories also tend to leave out some
details, such as ages and addresses, which are
routinely found in print. Broadcasters write
shorter sentences so they can read them aloud
without running out of breath.

40

Reporters for radio and television must be
attuned to the sound of the words they use.
Like poets, they are alert to pacing and rhythm.
Consider this sentence from a script by Edward
R. Murrow, the famed CBS correspondent
who covered World War II from London,
“The blackout stretches from Birmingham to
Bethlehem, but tonight, over Britain, the skies
are clear.” This is writing that is meant to be
heard. The words are simple; the ending is
crisp.
Broadcast writers must be wary of language
that might be correct on the printed page, but
sounds ridiculous when read aloud. When
the American actress and TV entertainer
Lucille Ball died, a print story called her “the
83-year-old Ball.” On the radio, the story said,
“Lucille Ball was 83 years old.” (It thus avoided
confusion over other meanings for “ball” in
English.) Broadcast writers also should beware
of words that sound alike but have different
meanings. In English, for example, “miner”
could easily be confused with “minor.” These
words must be used in the proper context so
their meaning is clear. Broadcast journalists
make a habit of reading their copy out loud
before going on the air to catch this kind of
problem, as well as potentially embarrassing
double meanings that are not obvious on paper.
Reporting on a charity golf tournament, you
don’t want to say that someone “played a round
with the prime minister.” (“Play around” in
English can connote “misbehaved with.”)
Even though broadcast scripts are written
to be read out loud, it’s just as important to
spell correctly for broadcast as well as print.
Misspellings often result in stumbles or
mispronunciations on the air. To make sure
they know how to correctly pronounce difficult
words, broadcast journalists often include
phonetic spellings in their scripts. Correct
spelling also matters more today because many
stations post their stories online. Some stations
have computer software that automatically
converts scripts into closed captioning or
subtitling for their newscasts as a service to
deaf viewers. In both cases, misspellings reflect
badly on the reporters and the station.

Radio and television news is written in a
more conversational style than news in print.
Put another way, broadcast journalists should
write the way they speak. A newspaper story
might read, “The man escaped in a red Toyota
truck, police said.” But in broadcast, attribution
comes first, so the script would read, “Police
say the man escaped in a red Toyota truck.” To
maintain a conversational tone, broadcasters
don’t need to use complete names and titles
in news stories. Generally speaking, middle
initials are not used on the air unless the initial
is an essential part of the name. And at times,
not even the name is required. A newspaper
story would note, “Pakistani Foreign Minister
Khurshid Mahmood Kasuri met his Israeli
counterpart Silvan Shalom in Istanbul, Turkey,
on Thursday.” But the radio story might simply
say, “The foreign ministers of Pakistan and Israel
met in Turkey today.”
Immediacy is a key feature of broadcast
news. If something is happening while you
are on the air, you can and should say so:
“The president is flying to Capetown ... ” is
more immediate than, “The president flies
to Capetown today.” Generally speaking,
radio and television reporters avoid using
time references in their leads unless the
event happened today. Where Wednesday’s

newspaper would publish this lead: “President
Mbeki flew to Capetown on Tuesday,” the
radio newscast Wednesday morning would
put it differently: “President Mbeki has arrived
in Capetown.” Better yet, the writer would
look forward to what the president is doing in
Capetown on Wednesday so the story could
be written in the present tense: “This morning,
President Mbeki meets with students at the
University of Capetown.”

Sound

T

he sound bites that radio and television
reporters use in their stories are the
broadcast equivalent of quotes, but
choosing them requires an additional
layer of decision-making. It is not enough for
the sound bite to make sense on paper. It must
be clear enough to understand over the radio
or on television. Broadcast journalists have
to be mindful of how long a sound bite runs.
What looks short on paper may actually take
someone quite a long time to say — so long, in
some cases, that it cannot be used in its entirety
without making the entire story exceed its
allotted time.
Broadcast writers pay particular attention
to the transitions into and out of sound bites.
Their goal is to create a seamless narrative that
will retain the attention of the audience all the
way through the story. If a sound bite begins
with a pronoun, for example, the writer must
make the meaning clear at the front end, by
crafting the sentence so that the ear gets the
information needed to decode what’s coming
next. Let’s say there’s an outbreak of head lice
in the local schools. A school nurse says in
a sound bite, “They come in here scratching
and we just know what we’ve got. It’s so
obvious.” When she says “they,” she means the
schoolchildren. It won’t do if the sentence
before that sound bite says, “School nurses say
they are dealing with a terrible outbreak of head
lice,” because the sound bite that follows would
appear to suggest that “they” refers to head lice.
41

Instead, the reporter might say, “The outbreak
of head lice means that nurses like Mary Smith
are seeing a lot more children than usual today.”
In addition to sound bites, stories on radio
and television may include so-called “natural”
or “wild” sound. This is sound that is captured
while reporting a story: the whistling of the
wind, a police siren, children shouting for joy.
Using this sound in telling the story is standard
practice in some parts of the world. Including
natural sound allows listeners or viewers to
experience a place or situation for themselves,
instead of the reporter telling them about it.
Sound also can provide an audio transition
from one location to another, leading the
audience into the next scene.
Natural sound can be used at a low audio
level, under the reporter’s words, or “up full” so
it can be clearly heard. Either way, the sound
helps the reporter tell the story. Like mortar
between bricks, good natural sound holds the
story together. American photojournalist Steve
Sweitzer says that, in television, using natural
sound is essential to tell a complete story.
“Sound is the other part of the picture,” he says.

Broadcast
journalists should
write the way
they speak.

42

Pic t u res

T

elevision is much more than radio with
pictures. Skilled television journalists
marry their words with the video in order
to tell a more powerful story. Pictures are
not just video “wallpaper,” they are an essential
part of the story. The visuals tell the “what” of
the story. The words tell the “why.” To quote Ed
Bliss again, “Seeing may be believing, but it isn’t
understanding.”
Television reporters need to know what
video they will use in a story before beginning
to write. Whenever possible, they should look
at all of the video first, so they can be sure that
what they write will match the pictures. This is
not just an issue of style. Research has shown
that viewers understand and remember stories
much better when the words and video match,
that is, when they tell the same basic story.
When the video does not match the words,
viewers tend to remember more of what they
see than what they hear. Imagine, for example,
a story about the effects of a major storm on a
country’s fuel supplies. If the video shows only
storm damage and its aftermath, the viewer
might miss the central point that fuel supplies
have been disrupted. The story would be easier
to follow if the video showed storm damage
while the reporter talked about the aftermath,
and then switched to pictures of stranded fuel
trucks or people waiting in line trying to buy
gasoline while the reporter described the effect
of the storm on fuel supplies.
Synchronizing words and pictures does not
mean that reporters should simply describe
what the viewer can see. Let’s say the video
shows a farm truck driving down a dusty dirt
road. There’s no point in having a reporter say
something obvious, such as, “The Robertsons
live at the end of a long country road.” Instead,
the audio track should offer information that
adds context and meaning to the picture. In
this case, the reporter might say, “The drought
has been so bad that the Robertsons haven’t had
any crops to sell this year.”

Newsc a sts

R

eaders of newspapers or of news sites
on the Internet have considerable
control over how they receive the news.
Radio listeners and television viewers
have less. A newspaper reader can choose to
begin with the front page, the sports section,
or the obituaries. An online reader can scroll
through a Web site’s home page offerings before
deciding what specific item to read from start
to finish. But a radio listener or a television
viewer has to consume the news the way it’s
made available; the order of stories is predetermined by the newscast producer.
Newscasts generally begin, or “lead,” with
what the producer believes is the major story
of the day. That does not mean that every story
following the lead is considered slightly less
important than the one before it. The producer
has to consider the impact of the newscast as a
whole, not just each individual story. Producers
often place an important or unusual story lower
down in the newscast and “tease” what’s coming
next as a way of holding the viewers’ interest
and keeping them tuned in. (We talked about
teases in Chapter 4.)
Much as a newspaper editor decides on the
layout of pages, the television news producer
creates a rundown or lineup for the newscast,
listing all stories in the order they will run. The
producer’s job is to know exactly how long each
story will last because the newscast must begin
and end at a specific time. Once the program
starts, the producer makes sure it stays on
schedule. If a story runs longer than expected,
the producer has to decide what to cut to make
up for it. If a story is dropped, the producer has
to provide material to fill the gap.

O n l in e News

O

nline journalism has certain attributes
of print journalism and of broadcast
journalism, and other attributes that
are unique to the Web. Frequently Web
sites offer news articles to be read, just as they
would be in a newspaper. At other times, the
audience may select a video clip, so the Web
site resembles a TV broadcast. An online story
that takes full advantage of the new medium
allows the reader to become a participant,
choosing his or her own path through the
information presented. “Only if there is some
element of control by the user is it a new story
form,” says Nora Paul, director of the University
of Minnesota’s Institute for New Media Studies.
“Online journalists must think on multiple
levels at once: words, ideas, story structure,
design, interactives, audio, video, photos, news
judgment,” says Jonathan Dube, publisher of
CyberJournalist.net, a Web site that focuses
on how the Internet and other technologies
are changing the media. “TV is about showing
the news. Print is more about telling and
explaining. Online is about showing, telling,
demonstrating, and interacting.” To make that
possible, online journalists present information
in layers, using a variety of story forms.

43

O nli ne Stor y Fo r ms

O n l in e Writ in g

T

O

he most basic online-story form has
been described as “print plus.” It’s a text
story that includes additional elements
like photographs, audio, and video, or
hyperlinks to more information. By embedding
links, the journalist can take the reader to
additional information on separate Web pages,
some of which may be provided by sources
outside the news organization, with more
background or history. Online stories can be
enhanced by including links to databases that
a user can search. For example, a story about
falling test scores at secondary schools across
the country could link to a database of results
from all schools. The user could search for a
specific school, for all schools in a particular
city, or compare the results of different schools.
A more innovative approach uses “clickable
interactives” or multimedia graphics specifically
designed to illustrate a story. The graphic
elements are laid out in linear fashion, but the
reader can explore them independently in any
order. The same is true of most online “slideshows,” which combine text and audio with still
photographs in a multi-media experience for
the user.
Tools that allow the reader to navigate
through a 360-degree view of a location can
enhance online storytelling, too. So can Flash
animation, one of the software programs that
allows you to design interactive content: video,
graphics, and animation. For example, the
BBC in London created a Web site about illegal
drugs and alcohol that allowed the reader to
“choose” a particular drug and dosage, and then
select a part of the body — like the brain or
heart — to read about the effects of that drug
on that organ, as well as safety information.
Online sites even have used quizzes and games
to tell stories by breaking the information into
questions and answers and letting the user
discover what the reporter has already learned.

44

nline writing, says Jonathan Dube, is
a cross between print and broadcast
writing. He maintains that the short,
simple style favored by broadcasters
makes online writing easier to follow. But
he says too many Web sites ignore the basic
rules of good writing. A conversational tone
is good, says Dube, but grammar and spelling
still matter. Television news manager Scott
Atkinson says his best advice is to write for
the Internet as you would write an e-mail to a
friend. “That doesn’t mean you can misspell
words, ignore story structure, or leave out
context,” he says. “What it does mean is you
should write in the most intimate style you
can muster.”
Because Web-based news sites tend to offer
readers many choices, writers should avoid
delayed or anecdotal leads that don’t quickly
indicate what a story is about. The lead should
give the reader a good reason to continue
reading; otherwise, he or she probably will
click on another story. Stories on line generally
are shorter than newspaper stories. A good
guideline is to limit an online story to about 800
words and to keep it all on one page. Studies
have found that readers are willing to scroll
through text on line; there is no need to force
them to click to additional pages for more of
the same story. But to make the text easier
to absorb, Dube suggests that online writers
break the text into more blocks and use more
subheads and bullet points to separate ideas
than they would in print.

Online journalism may allow readers to
respond immediately and directly to the writer
or editor via e-mail or even in a live Web
chat. In addition, many sites provide space for
readers to post their feedback or opinions, so
others can read what they have written and
respond. Minnesota Public Radio (MPR) in the
United States solicits input for stories both on
the air and on line. Listeners are asked to call
or e-mail additional information. Stories on
the MPR Web site include a “Help us cover this
story” link, so the audience can add comments
and insights.
MPR also surveys its audience before
producing special reports, such as an
examination of the state’s economy. MPR News
Vice President Bill Buzenberg says audience
input results in “much more sophisticated
reporting, with more depth and lots of realworld examples and voices.”

45

6

46

SPECIALIZED JOURNALISM

Many news organizations assign journalists to cover specific
areas, either geographic or topical, known as “beats.” This is a
term originally used to describe a regular route for a sentr y or
policeman. Journalists get to know the territor y and people
who make up their beat, and in many cases they have to learn
specialized vocabulary in order to understand
their sources. This does not mean they use that
vocabulary in their stories. On the contrary,
good beat reporters become translators and
interpreters, making information that might
otherwise be obscure accessible to the general
public.
Beats are rare in the smallest newsrooms,
where every reporter is expected to cover every
kind of story. But in larger news organizations,
print and broadcast, journalists may have the
opportunity to focus on a particular type of
news. Some beats are traditional: government,
police, courts, and business, for example.
Others vary with the territory. Depending
on a community’s make-up, reporters might
be assigned to cover the environment, or the
elderly, or education as a beat.
Beat reporters have one basic responsibility:
to stay on top of the news in their specialty
area. They are expected to cover stories that
arise on their beat — meetings, printed reports
or Web postings, and other routine events
— but they’re also responsible for finding news
that goes beyond the obvious. Beat reporters
develop stories through their own enterprise,
by building relationships with sources who
will keep them abreast of what’s really going
on, not just in public but behind the scenes.
They produce a wide variety of stories, from
breaking news to feature profiles. “The best
beat reporters I’ve known are well organized,
determined, with a clear sense of mission, and

a wide range of sources,” says Chip Scanlan,
a former beat reporter for Knight Ridder
newspapers and currently with The Poynter
Institute.

B eat R epo r t in g Sk il l s

W

hatever beat a journalist chooses or
is assigned to cover, one basic skill is
essential: the ability to understand
the institutions that dominate the
beat. Learning how the system works takes
time and effort, but it pays off in stories that
non-beat reporters can’t match. Eric Nalder,
the reporter who uncovered the life raft story
discussed in Chapter 2, uses these questions to
begin learning his way around a beat:
• Who are the players?
• Who is in charge?
• Who are the regulators?
• What are the rules?
• How are things done?
• Where are the mistakes recorded?
• Where is the spending recorded?
• Who knows the real story and how can I
get it?
To get answers to these questions, a reporter
has to study hard and “walk the beat.” Read
everything you can about the topic, collect
meeting schedules and agendas, subscribe to
specialized publications. But most importantly,
47

A reporter has to
study hard and
“ w a l k t h e b e a t .”

Covering a beat means getting to know
people well enough that they will trust you,
while still maintaining a professional distance.
The hardest part of being a beat reporter, says
Scanlan, is “dealing with sources you have to
return to every day even if you’ve written a
story they don’t like.”

G overn ment a n d Po l it ics
get up and go. Beat reporters cannot depend
solely on the telephone; they have to spend time
on the beat, meeting and talking with people.
“No one ever got a story sitting around the
newsroom,” says veteran American journalist
Mike Mather, an investigative reporter at
WTKR-TV in Norfolk, Virginia. Get to know
everyone who could be helpful — from officials
to clerks — and pass out your business card to
everyone you meet on the beat. Build a source
list with as much contact information as you
can pry loose, and stay in touch with those
people by making regular “beat checks.” In
addition to covering the key players on the beat,
a good beat reporter also looks at how their
actions affect people in the community.
Beat reporting requires strong
organizational and personal skills. Staying
organized means using a calendar to track
meetings, hearings, and due dates for reports
or action. It means having a reliable, portable
system for filing and retrieving contact
information, especially phone numbers and
e-mail addresses. And it means keeping a file
of future story ideas, with daily lists of things
to follow up on. Many reporters now keep this
information in their computers, using programs
that make it easy to search for people and dates.
But they also need it when they’re not in the
office, so they either carry a printout, a laptop
computer, or that useful hand-held device
that allows remote Web access, the personal
digital assistant (PDA). Since technology can
be unreliable, it’s important to make a back-up
copy of the information frequently.

48

R

eporters who cover government need
to understand its inner workings, and
to look for the impact of government
decisions. Reporters who ask the
basic question, “Who cares?,” when covering
government are able to find people whose lives
are affected by what government does. Stories
that feature these people are more interesting to
the audience.
Much of the business of government is
conducted in meetings, so reporters on the beat
should expect to cover plenty of them. A dull
meeting does not justify a dull story, however.
The audience depends on the journalist to tell
them only what’s important, not everything
that happened in chronological order. The
best stories about meetings focus not on what
happened in the room, but on the people who
are affected by what happened.
On the government beat, it’s critical for
journalists to know how to read and interpret a
budget and other financial statements. “Follow
the money” is good advice for all journalists,
but particularly for those covering government
and politics. Stories about government funding
may seem dry, but taxes and spending affect
the audience directly and people need to
know where their money is going. In general,
documents are the lifeblood of government, so
beat reporters must be able to obtain them and
understand them.

Political reporters in a democracy have one
central mission: to provide citizens with the
information they need to make an informed
choice between the candidates for elective
office. To do that, journalists need to examine
the candidates’ backgrounds and qualifications,
their positions on the key issues, and what the
candidates are saying in campaign appearances
and advertising. Reporters who cover politics
look at the candidates’ supporters, too, since
their interests can often shed light on what a
politician will do if elected.
Public opinion surveys are a staple of
campaign coverage, but journalists need to
look closely before deciding whether a poll’s
results are worth reporting (See sidebar,
“Questions Journalists Should Ask About
Polls,” on page 53). “Horse-race” or “tracking”
polls that tell the percentage of voters who
support each candidate are of limited value
except as a fleeting snapshot of the race on
any given day. Some journalists believe these
polls may actually bias voters in favor of the
leading candidate because people generally
want to support a winner. But researchers in
the United States have discovered that voters
who pay attention to polls also learn more

about the issues involved in the campaign. The
researchers’ advice to journalists is to keep
reporting the results of legitimate “tracking”
polls throughout the campaign, but not to make
them a major focus of the coverage.
When it comes to campaign issues,
journalists should pay attention not only to
what the candidates say but also to what the
voters want to know. Many news organizations
conduct “issue polls” to see what topics are of
great interest to the public during an election
year. Sometimes candidates may try to avoid
discussing a controversial issue that matters
deeply to voters. In that case, journalists should
raise the questions the public is asking. Good
political reporters do not simply point out
where the candidates stand on the issues, they
ask what the candidates have done about those
issues in previous elected office or in other
positions they may have held. To bring the
issues to life, reporters look for people whose
individual stories illustrate why the issues
matter and what difference it would make if one
candidate or the other wins the election.

Busin ess a n d Eco n o mics

T

he business beat touches the lives of
almost everyone. Unemployment, the
cost of food and fuel, personal savings
and investment, all of these topics matter
not just to business leaders but also to workers
and consumers. Covering the local business
beat means reporting on employers and
workers, construction, and property sales, as
well as the business sectors that keep the local
economy going, be it farming, manufacturing,
mining, or health care. At the national level,
business reporters cover more abstruse topics,
such as commodity and stock markets, interest
rates, and institutional debt.

49

Reporters covering business and economics
have to make their stories accessible to a
general audience. They must understand
economic concepts and terms and be able to
define or restate them in plain language. This
is good practice even for reporters working for
specialized publications or broadcasts, whose
audience might be expected to be familiar with
the terms. In the United States, for example,
The Wall Street Journal is aimed at businesssavvy readers, but still it spells out the meaning
of common terms like “gross national product,”
the total value of a nation’s output of goods and
services. Over time, business reporters develop
their own list of concise definitions they can
plug into their stories. The audience will
appreciate a clear statement of what is meant
by “debt conversion,” “currency devaluation,”
“privatization,” and other economic terms.
They will appreciate stories that explain why
those concepts matter to individuals as well as
to corporations and governments.
Business reporters need to be able to read
and understand financial statements, balance
sheets, and annual reports. They often find
stories by looking at changes in income or
spending from year to year. They compare
companies to others in the same industry or
the same region. For example, when a business
closes or fails, reporters will ask not only how
many people have lost their jobs but also
what impact the shutdown will have on the
community. To answer that larger question,
they need to know whether the company
was one of the largest employers in the area,
whether other local companies provide
the same product or service, what the local
unemployment rate is, and so on.
The business beat requires a deeper
knowledge of mathematics and statistics than
most other topic areas. But business reporters
should use numbers sparingly in their stories,
because too many figures make a story dry and
dull. The most compelling business stories
show the significance of developments by
putting them in human terms, describing how
individuals have been or will be affected.
50

Hea l t h , S cien ce, a n d t h e
Env iro n ment

S

tories about health and the environment
have a direct impact on people’s lives.
Reporters who cover AIDS know that
ignorance can be almost as dangerous
as the disease itself; their stories can educate
people so they can protect themselves.
Journalists on the health, science, and
environment beat may report about everything
from avian flu to the mapping of the human
genome and the effects of damming rivers. For
each of these topics, the underlying issues are
complicated and the journalist’s job is to explain
them clearly.
When dealing with these kinds of stories,
journalists need to be familiar with the
language of scientists and medical researchers,
which can be confusing to laymen. Don’t be
intimidated by it, says reporter Dennis Bueckert
of the Canadian Press news agency, and don’t
use it in your stories, either. Like business
reporters, science writers develop their own list
of definitions and explanations for complicated
terms so they can write stories that make sense
to the general public.
Reporters who cover scientific subjects
need to understand the scientific method,
basic mathematics, and statistics, so they can
double-check the results of research studies.
At the same time, they should resist the urge to
turn every development into a breakthrough,
or to press for “yes” or “no” answers instead of
accepting probabilities. Their stories may not
seem as dramatic but they will certainly be
more accurate.
Journalists who are trained to report all
sides of a story often fall into a trap when
covering science. Giving even-handed
coverage to differing scientific opinions can
actually mislead the audience. For example,

Second, Rogers says, audiences don’t bring
anywhere near the background journalists do
to any kind of story, much less to complicated
ones. So, if you’re covering a science
conference, for example, do not assume your
audience has heard or read yesterday’s story,
or that they’ll hear tomorrow’s. Give them the
background they need to understand the issue
and do it as if your story were the only one they
would ever read or hear on the subject. It may
well be.

Po l ice a n d Co ur t s

R
the overwhelming majority of scientists
believe that exposure to lead can harm
children’s intelligence levels. Only a few
researchers dispute the connection. A reporter
could mention both viewpoints, but not in
such a way as to suggest there is no scientific
consensus on the issue.
Carol Rogers, a journalism professor at
the University of Maryland who has edited
books about science writing, has two useful
tips for beat reporters. First: identification
matters. Journalists often don’t identify the
experts they quote in a meaningful way. The
audience deserves to know why you are quoting
a particular person. For example, a story about
an international conference on climate change
quoted the head of the White House Office of
Science and Technology, but never mentioned
that he was a respected climate scientist.
Providing that information would have allowed
the audience to better assess the validity of his
comments.

eporters who cover crime and the
courts need to know how the system
works. Few reporters have any training
in criminal justice, but veterans on
the police beat recommend taking at least
one course on the subject. Police officials are
notoriously reluctant to provide information
to journalists, but if you know their rules,
regulations, and procedures, you can ask better
questions and improve your chances of finding
out what you want to know.
Police reporters need to know exactly
how crimes are defined in the community
they cover. In the United States, for example,
a “burglary” and a “robbery” are not the same
thing. Burglary involves breaking into a
building to commit a crime. Robbery is stealing
money or property by force. Developing
a glossary of essential terms can prevent
embarrassing mistakes. A police press release
may provide the basic facts about a crime, but
good reporters dig deeper. They go to the scene
to look for details and to talk with neighbors or
eyewitnesses, whenever possible.

51

Court reporters must understand the
judicial process from beginning to end. They
should know what happens when a suspect
is arrested, charged, arraigned, tried, and
sentenced or released. Experienced reporters
say the best way to learn the process is to spend
time at the courthouse. Begin with the court
clerks, who keep track of the docket — the
list of cases — and the calendar. Find out how
to get copies of the court record, filings, and
testimony. Read the case files — including
motions and pleadings before the trial — and
keep track of what’s reported about the case
if you can’t be in court every day, which
frequently happens.
Defense attorneys are some of the best
sources of information on the justice beat.
They often are more willing than prosecutors
to talk with reporters about cases on which
they are working. Do your best to understand
legal jargon, but avoid using it in your stories.
“Lawyers are counseled to use big words
to confuse journalists,” says S.L. Alexander,
author of Covering the Courts: A Handbook for
Journalists. “If you don’t know what something
means, ask the person you’re interviewing to
explain it,” she advises.

52

Spo r t s

S

ports reporters do some of the best
writing in journalism. Their stories
naturally involve drama, emotions,
and outsized personalities, says former
TV sports reporter Bill Schwanbeck, who
now teaches at Quinnipiac University in
Connecticut. Good sportswriters do much
more than report the score of a game or the
results of an athletic competition. They provide
the basics, of course, but they also provide
perspective and context that the audience can’t
get from being at the game or watching it on
television. Sportswriters explain the why and
how of what happened, not just the who and
the what. They also report on the business of
sports, and write feature stories about athletes,
team owners, and fans.
But sports reporters still have to start
with the fundamentals. They need to be
knowledgeable about all sports, understand the
rules of the game or sport they are covering,
and how the score is determined. They work on
very tight deadlines, especially when covering
night games. They have to keep score and make
notes at the same time, not an easy task during
a fast-moving game. Most importantly, they
need to find a theme for each story and build
the details around it.
In many cases, the best story is not on the
field. Sportswriters probe for what’s happening
behind the scenes, the atmosphere in the locker
room, or the tension between two players that
might be affecting the entire team. They treat
players and managers with respect, but they do
not engage in hero-worship. They often enjoy
the sports they cover, but they are not fans or
boosters of any one team. Like all journalists,
they should be fair and independent observers
of the stories they cover.

Just as business and science reporters avoid
economic and business jargon, sportswriters
should avoid terms that only the most ardent
fan or coach would know. “Keep it simple,”
says former sports reporter Mike Reilley, now
publisher of the online site The Journalist’s
ToolBox. “Don’t get cute.” He also warns young
journalists to expect some interviews with
athletes and coaches to be confrontational,
especially after a loss. Many professional
athletes thrive on intimidation, Reilley says, so
be prepared to stand your ground.

Q ues tio n s J o urn alis ts Sh o uld
As k Ab o ut Po lls
• Who did the poll? Is this a legitimate survey
organization? Who else do they poll for?
• Who paid for the poll? What is their political
agenda?
• How many people were interviewed?
• How were they selected?
• What kinds of people were interviewed?
• Are the results based on answers of all or
some of those polled?
• When was the poll conducted?
• How was the poll conducted?
• What were the questions?
• What was the margin of error? What were
the raw numbers?
• Are the results different from other polls and,
if so, why?
• Is this poll worth reporting?
Excerpted with permission from
20 Questions a Journalist Should Ask About Poll
Results, Third Edition, by Sheldon R. Gawiser,
Ph.D., and G. Evans Witt.
http://www.ncpp.org

53

7

54

E T H I C S A N D L AW

A free press has tremendous power, if power is defined as the
capacity to influence others. The news media in a democrac y
generally have the right to repor t information without prior
government approval. Many countries provide legal protec tions
to journalists so they can exercise that right. But with rights
come responsibilities. For journalists, the most
basic responsibility in a free society is to report
the news accurately and fairly: to practice
ethical journalism.
Ethics is a system of principles that guides
action. While the law establishes what you can
and cannot do in a given situation, ethics tells
you what you should do. It is based on values
— personal, professional, social, and moral —
and springs from reasoning. Ethical decisionmaking simply means applying these values in
your daily work.
The Declaration of Chapultepec, approved
by countries in the Americas in 1994 as a
counter to pressures on freedom of expression
throughout the hemisphere, makes clear that
ethical journalism is essential to the long-term
success of the news media:
The credibility of the press is linked to its
commitment to truth, to the pursuit of
accuracy, fairness, and objectivity and to
the clear distinction between news and
advertising. The attainment of these goals
and the respect for ethical and professional
values may not be imposed. These are the
exclusive responsibility of journalists and the
media. In a free society, it is public opinion
that rewards or punishes.
Ethical lapses do occur in journalism.
Reporters have invented information. Editors
have accepted payments from sources. News
organizations have published advertisements
in the guise of news. When this happens, the

public has a right to question everything that
appears in the news media. All journalists, and
all news organizations, suffer when journalists
behave unethically because that behavior calls
the profession’s credibility into question. When
credibility suffers, so does a news organization’s
ability to survive economically.

Et h ica l Pr in cipl es
“

T

here is one sacred rule of journalism,”
said the late reporter and prize-winning
novelist John Hersey, who covered the
aftermath of the atomic bomb attack on
Hiroshima. “The writer must not invent. The
legend on the license must read: NONE OF
THIS WAS MADE UP.” Ethical journalists do
not put words in people’s mouths or pretend to
have been somewhere they have not. And they
do not pass off the work of others as their own.
Fabrication and plagiarism are violations of
basic journalistic standards the world over. But
not all transgressions are so clear.
Journalists face ethical dilemmas every
day, under pressure from owners, competitors,
advertisers, and the public. They need a
process to resolve these dilemmas, so that the
journalism they produce is ethical. They need
a way of thinking about ethical issues that
will help them make good decisions, even on
deadline.

55

For journalists,
the most basic
responsibility in
a free society is
to report the news
accurately and
fairly.
This way of thinking is grounded in the
principles journalists rely on. These are
the basic principles of the U.S. Society of
Professional Journalists, a voluntary journalism
organization:
• S eek truth and report it.
Journalists should be honest, fair, and
courageous in gathering, reporting, and
interpreting information.
•M
 inimize harm.
Ethical journalists treat sources, subjects,
and colleagues as human beings deserving of
respect.
•A
 ct independently.
Journalists should be free of obligation to any
interest other than the public’s right to know.
•B
 e accountable.
Journalists are accountable to their readers,
listeners, viewers, and each other.
On the surface, it may seem easy enough to
abide by these principles. Of course, journalists
should seek the truth and treat their sources
with respect. But oftentimes, the principles
themselves are in conflict. Journalists who seek
the truth may discover information that will
be hurtful to the family of a person involved
in wrongdoing. A reporter’s membership in
a non-governmental organization may allow
her to learn more about a story the group is
involved with, but her association with the
group may also compromise her independence
and be difficult to justify to the audience. In
56

many cases, making an ethical decision means
choosing not between right and wrong but
between right and right.
How, then, can journalists possibly make
good ethical decisions? Some situations are
best dealt with by avoiding them in the first
place. For example, reporters may choose not
to belong to any outside groups, or they may
disqualify themselves from covering stories
involving any groups they do belong to. In other
cases, a journalist must seek the best possible
balance between conflicting principles, always
keeping in mind the primary importance of
seeking the truth and serving the public.

Et h ica l D ecisio n -M a k in g

S

ome newsrooms deal with ethical
quandaries from the top down.
Whenever an issue or dilemma arises, a
senior manager decides what to do. This
approach has the advantage of being quick,
but it can be arbitrary. It does nothing to help
journalists make good decisions when they
are out in the field or when the manager is
unavailable. For that reason, many newsrooms
have adopted an ethical decision-making
process that is more inclusive and that helps all
journalists make good decisions under a variety
of circumstances.
The first step in the process is to define the
dilemma. Most people recognize when they
are facing an ethical quandary. An internal
alarm goes off. Something does not feel quite
right about a situation. When that happens,
it’s important to spell out what’s bothering you.
What are the values that may be compromised?
What journalistic issues are at stake? Often
there is tension between a journalistic goal
and an ethical stand. The reporter who has an
exclusive story may want to rush it into print
before any one else gets it, but he also needs
to consider the possible consequences. What
if the story turns out to be wrong? Journalists
should not sacrifice their ethical values to
achieve other objectives, such as beating the
competition.

The next step after defining the problem is
to collect more information to help you make
a good decision. Consult newsroom policies
and guidelines, if any exist, and talk to others
about the dilemma. Begin with colleagues and
supervisors in the newsroom, but don’t stop
there. It’s often useful to include other voices,
people who are not directly involved in the
story but who are knowledgeable about the
circumstances.
It’s important to note that journalists, unlike
doctors, are not expected to promise to do no
harm. Many truthful and important stories
will hurt people’s feelings or reputations. It’s
inevitable. But journalists do try to minimize
the harm by not putting people at unnecessary
risk. Bob Steele, who teaches journalism ethics
at The Poynter Institute, likes to ask: “What if
the roles were reversed? How would I feel?”
Let’s say a reporter has discovered a factory
where boys under the age of 12 work 10 hours a
day, six days a week, and are paid less than half
the country’s minimum wage. The country’s
constitution prohibits employers from hiring
anyone under 14 and it is illegal for anyone to
work more than 45 hours a week. Finding the
factory means the reporter has proof of child
exploitation, but what more does he need to
know before publishing or broadcasting the
story?
Telling the truth about the factory would
certainly have consequences, and some of them
could be hurtful. When faced with this kind of
story, it can be helpful to create a list of people
and institutions that might be affected by the

Ethical journalism

story and to consider the impact the story
might have. The story about the factory would
affect the boys directly, of course, but it would
also affect their families and the factory owner.
Knowing the possible consequences, journalists
can begin to look at alternatives for presenting
the information so the story remains truthful
but does not cause as much harm. In the case
of the factory, the journalist might decide to use
photos of the children but not to name them,
in an effort to limit the potential harm the story
could cause.
That’s just one example of a journalistic
decision that can have ethical consequences.
Others include the type and placement of the
coverage, as well as its tone. The impact of a
front-page story with a banner headline and a
large photograph is considerably greater than
a smaller story that runs on an inside page. A
television story that is promoted multiple times
before it airs would have more impact, and
therefore greater ethical consequences, than a
story told once in the middle of a newscast.
Going through a process to make good
ethical decisions puts journalists and news
organizations in a position to justify their
actions clearly. By explaining what was done
and why, journalists are able to bolster their
credibility and justify the public’s trust in them.
Newsrooms that value ethical decisionmaking make sure these kinds of issues are
discussed, and not just when a dilemma occurs.
Some newsrooms hold regular meetings to
discuss what they would do in hypothetical
situations. Journalists who practice listening
with an open mind and who keep their
emotions in check and avoid becoming
inflexible about their positions are able to put
these skills to work when facing a real ethical
concern.

is essential to the
long-term success of
the news media.

57

Ethics Cod e s

Co d es o f Co n d u c t

J

I

ournalism associations and federations
around the world have established codes
of ethics to guide the work of member
journalists. Ethics codes can cover
everything from plagiarism to privacy and from
corrections to confidentiality. Some are brief
and vaguely worded, while others are lengthy
and quite explicit. Claude-Jean Bertrand, who
is a professor at the University of Paris’s French
Press Institute and has examined ethics codes
from many countries, says that most include
these three basic elements:
• F undamental values, including respect for life
and human solidarity;
• F undamental prohibitions, including not
to lie, cause needless harm, or appropriate
someone else’s property;
• J ournalistic principles, including accuracy,
fairness, and independence.
These codes are sometimes voluntary
in nature, with no clear consequences for
violators. But the expectation is that peers and
employers will hold journalists who behave
unethically accountable. In some countries,
press councils hear complaints against
journalists and can recommend action to
correct mistakes. Journalism review magazines
also serve a corrective function by exposing the
behavior of unethical journalists. Some news
organizations have a staff person, commonly
called an “ombudsman,” who watches out for
errors and ethical lapses and serves as the
public’s representative inside the newsroom.
In countries where journalists are required
to belong to a union or association, ethics codes
often include an enforcement provision. For
example, the Australian Journalists Association
has judiciary committees that investigate
charges of unethical behavior brought against
journalists. A journalist found in violation can
be rebuked, fined, or expelled from the group.

58

n addition to national and regional codes
of ethics, many news organizations have
their own codes of conduct or standards of
practice that they expect their journalists
to follow. These codes may spell out specific
actions or activities that are either encouraged
or prohibited, or that require the approval of a
manager.
Many news organizations limit what
journalists can do both on and off the job. The
main reason for these limitations is to protect
the credibility of news organizations. Reporters
and photographers may be told explicitly that
they cannot manipulate or “stage” the news by
asking people to do something for a story that
they would not do ordinarily. Reporters may
not be allowed to conceal their identities to get
a story, unless there is a clear and compelling
public interest in the information and it cannot
be obtained any other way. A television station
may explicitly forbid the use of hidden cameras
or surreptitious recording in gathering the
news, unless a manager approves it for publicinterest reasons.
With the advent of digital photography,
new standards have been added to prohibit
altering photographs or video in a way that
could mislead the audience. Several highprofile incidents contributed to these new
policies, including a photograph on the cover of
National Geographic magazine in the 1980s that
digitally moved the famous Pyramids of Giza in
Egypt closer together.
Many of the regulations in newsroom
codes of conduct address issues of journalistic
independence. To avoid even the appearance of
a conflict of interest, reporters may be forbidden
to own stock or have a personal interest in
companies they cover. Journalists may not be
allowed to take a public position on a political
issue or openly support a candidate for office.
The news organization may prohibit journalists
from having a business relationship with any
news source, or from doing any outside work
for pay unless approved by a manager.

The ethics policy of the Detroit Free
Press, an American newspaper in the state of
Michigan, clearly spells out what the newspaper
will and will not do. It prohibits paying sources
for news and says that sources will not be
allowed to review material before publication.
The Canadian Broadcasting Company (CBC)
has a lengthy standards manual that requires
employees to refuse any gifts that may appear
to influence a CBC decision; only modest gifts
of goodwill or hospitality offered during the
conduct of normal business may be accepted.
CBC employees may not accept offers of free
travel or accommodations in order to cover
a story.
It may not be possible to avoid every
potential conflict, but journalists need to be
aware that their conduct can reflect badly on
the news organization. When they sense that
a conflict might arise, they should be expected
to notify their supervisors. A reporter with a
personal connection to a story may ask that
a different reporter take on the assignment.
Many news organizations have made it their
practice to have reporters disclose relationships
in their stories that could even suggest a conflict
of interest, even if none exists.

Codes of conduct are typically internal
documents, but more and more news
organizations are posting them on their Web
sites so the public knows what to expect and
can hold the newspaper or station accountable
if its standards are violated.

Co mmu n it y St a n d a rd s

N

ews organizations often face conflicts
between newsworthiness and
community standards, and resolving
them requires the skilful practice of
ethical decision-making. Suppose an elected
official has used a racial slur in discussing
a member of the opposition party. Some
newspapers might print the exact words the
official used. Others could use a few letters
followed by dashes to indicate what he said
without spelling it out. And some newspapers
would likely report only that the official had
used offensive language. Newspaper editors
choose different solutions depending on
what they feel the readers would be willing to
tolerate. But sometimes they go ahead with a
decision they are certain would offend some
readers. Editors face similar difficult choices
when it comes to shocking photographs or
video the audience may find distasteful, but
that may be the most powerful way to tell an
important story.
To minimize the harm such a choice might
cause, many news managers now choose to
explain why they made the decision they did,
either in the text of the story or in a separate
“editor’s note” alongside it. For example, a
photograph of a mother holding the emaciated
body of her son who died of starvation would
certainly be disturbing. Instead of waiting
for angry phone calls and responding to each
individual complaint, the editor’s note might
say that this picture of suffering tells the story
of famine much more clearly than words alone.
By explaining their decisions to the public,
journalists can live up to the guiding principle
of accountability.
59

Le gal Issu e s

T

he cornerstone of international
standards on the news media is Article 19
of the United Nations Charter,
which states:
Everyone has the right to freedom of opinion
and expression; this right includes freedom
to hold opinions without interference and
to seek, receive, and impart information and
ideas through any media and regardless of
frontiers.

Countries that are members of the United
Nations are committed to upholding the
charter, including Article 19, but that hasn’t
stopped some countries from suppressing
their own news media and blocking access to
international news. In some cases, journalists
have been killed, imprisoned, or exiled for
trying to do their jobs.
Danilo Arbilla of the Inter American Press
Association and Uruguay’s Búsqueda says the
best press law is no law at all. In the ideal world,
he says, legislation governing press freedom
would take up no more than a couple of pages,
“containing clear and frankly worded clauses
prohibiting any attempt to regulate … freedom
of expression.” Needless to say, the world is
not an ideal place. Press laws vary around the
world to such an extent that it is not possible
to summarize them all. Some democratic
countries have laws to ensure journalists’ access
to public information, while others limit what
information can be published or aired. In some
countries, it is illegal to name the victim of a
sexual crime, or to identify juveniles accused of
criminal activity. Even within countries, there
may be differing local laws covering issues such
as whether a journalist can be forced to name
a confidential source or provide reporting
notes to a court of law, and under what
circumstances. Suffice it to say that journalists
need to be aware of the laws in the countries in
which they work, as well as ongoing efforts to
have restrictive laws lifted.

60

One of the most common kinds of legal
issues journalists face is libel or defamation. In
the United States, defamation is a statement of
fact that is substantially false about someone
who can be identified and that tends to injure
that person’s reputation. Defamation is
called “libel” when the statement is published
and “slander” when it is broadcast, but the
basic parameters are the same. Generally
speaking, if a statement is true, it cannot be
defamatory. Journalists therefore must confirm
independently what their sources say, if those
comments could defame another person.
As new technology changes the way
journalists do their work, media laws are being
reexamined. At the forefront are questions
such as: Should online reporters be granted
the same rights and protections as journalists
working for established news organizations?
Should those same privileges extend to Internet
bloggers? These questions are likely to remain
unresolved for some time.
Reporters obviously are subject to other
laws that apply to individuals in a given
country, such as laws governing privacy. A
journalist who wants access to information
cannot enter private property, take documents
without permission, or wiretap a telephone
and expect to face no legal consequences. A
news organization might decide that some
stories are so important they are worth the risk
of legal sanctions, but that is a different matter
to be decided jointly and carefully by editors,
reporters, and management.

8

JOURNALISM RESOURCES

M em be r ship G ro u p s
American Society of Newspaper Editors
http://www.asne.org/
Represents daily newspaper editors in the
Americas.
Association for Women Journalists
http://www.awjdfw.org/index.html
Promotes fair treatment of women in the media
and the newsroom through a scholarship
program, career grants, networking, advocacy,
career seminars, and the annual Vivian
Castleberry Awards Competition.
International Federation of Journalists
http://www.ifj.org/
Represents around 500,000 members in more
than 100 countries.
Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.
http://www.ire.org/
Represents investigative journalists.
National Press Photographers Association
http://www.nppa.org/
Serves print and television photojournalists.
Online News Association
http://www.journalists.org/
Serves online-media journalists.
Organization of News Ombudsmen
http://www.newsombudsmen.org/
International association of ombudsmen, or
internal newsroom critics.

Radio-Television News Directors
Association
http://www.rtnda.org
Membership group for electronic journalists
worldwide.
Society of Professional Journalists
http://www.spj.org/
The Society of Professional Journalists works
to improve and protect journalism. SPJ also
promotes the free practice of journalism and
high ethical standards of behavior. Encourages
the free flow of information vital to a wellinformed public, works to educate the next
generation of journalists, and protects First
Amendment guarantees of freedom of speech
and press.
Society for News Design
http://www.snd.org/
Represents designers, graphic artists,
illustrators, and other visual journalists.

R epo r t in g a n d Ed it in g
Cyberjournalist.net
http://www.cyberjournalist.net/tips_and_
tools/
CyberJournalist.net is a resource site that
focuses on how the Internet, convergence
(see note), and new technologies are changing
the media. The site offers tips, news, and
commentary about online journalism,
citizen’s media, digital storytelling, converged
news operations, and using the Internet as a
reporting tool.
61

Note: Convergence in the media refers
to cross-platform reporting. For example:
newspaper reporters file stories for the
newspaper, the paper’s Web site, and even a
TV or radio station owned by the newspaper.

Journalism.net
http://www.journalismnet.com
A full service site with dozens of useful links,
developed by a Canadian reporter.
NewsLab
http://www.newslab.org
Resources, story background, and training for
television and radio journalists.
Project for Excellence in Journalism
http://www.journalism.org
U.S. non-profit organization has resources and
research.
Reporter.org
http://www.reporter.org
Resources for journalists, including beat-related
links.

Spe c ia l ize d J ou r n al i s m
Most of these groups are membership
organizations that offer training at regularly
scheduled conferences and resources on their
Web sites.

BUSINESS: National Center for Business
Reporting
http://www.businessjournalism.org/
CONFLICT: Center for War, Peace, and the
News Media
http://www.bu.edu/globalbeat/
ENVIRONMENT: International
Federation of Environmental Journalists
http://www.ifej.org/

62

INVESTIGATIVE: International
Consortium of Investigative Journalists
http://www.publicintegrity.org/icij/
SCIENCE: International Science Writers
Association
http://internationalsciencewriters.org/
SPORTS: Associated Press Sports Editors
http://apse.dallasnews.com/

J o u r n a l ism Tra in in g
American Press Institute
http://www.americanpressinstitute.org/
Training center for print journalists based in the
United States. Site offers resources, including
useful links at The Journalist’s Toolbox.
CIESPAL
http://www.ciespal.net/
International journalism center for Latin
America, based in Ecuador. (Site is in Spanish.)
European Journalism Centre
http://www.ejc.nl/
Training institute based in The Netherlands,
has background information on European
media and resources.
IFRA Newsplex
http://www.newsplex.org/home.shtml
Training centers in the United States and
Germany.
Independent Journalism Foundation
http://www.ijf-cij.org/
Supports free press in Eastern Europe with
training at four regional centers.

International Center for Journalists
http://www.icfj.org
Training center based in the United States also
has links to worldwide training and fellowship
opportunities on its International Journalists’
Network: http://www.ijnet.org/

Internews
http://www.internews.org/
U.S. non-profit group offers journalism training
around the world.
Institute for the Advancement of
Journalism
http://www.iaj.org.za/
South African media training institute.
Institute for War and Peace Reporting
http://www.iwpr.net
Special reports by region from this Londonbased non-profit, in multiple languages.
John S. Knight Fellowships
http://knight.stanford.edu/program/index.html
Offers one-year professional journalism
fellowships at Stanford University for
outstanding mid-career journalists.
Journalismtraining.org (Society of
Professional Journalists)
http://www.journalismtraining.org/action/
home
Provides a centralized location for journalists
seeking information about professional
development. The centerpiece of the site is
a searchable database of local, regional, and
national journalism training programs.
No Train-No Gain
http://www.notrain-nogain.org/
Newspaper training editors share ideas and
exercises on this site.
The Poynter Institute
http://www.poynter.org/
A school for journalists, based in the United
States. Web site provides resources, story
background information, and plenty of links.

Freed o m o f Ex pressio n
Article 19
http://www.article19.org/
International non-profit group supports
freedom of expression and the free flow of
information as fundamental human rights.
Canadian Journalists for Free Expression
http://www.cjfe.org/
Nongovernmental group defends the rights of
journalists throughout the world.
Freedom Forum
http://www.freedomforum.org/
News outlet dealing primarily with U.S. First
Amendment and Freedom of Information
issues.
Inter American Press Association
http://www.sipiapa.org/
Supports free press in the Western Hemisphere.
Journalists for Human Rights
http://www.jhr.ca/
Canadian-based nonprofit, focused on
reporting in Africa.
The Reporters Committee for Freedom of
the Press
http://www.rcfp.org/
A nonprofit organization dedicated to
providing free legal assistance to journalists.
Reporters Without Borders
http://www.rsf.org/
International press freedom organization,
based in Paris. Resources in English, French,
and Spanish.
World Press Freedom Committee
http://www.wpfc.org/
International umbrella group defends and
promotes press freedom.

63

B o o ks

Et h ics Co d es

Clark, Roy Peter and Cole C. Campbell (eds.)
The Values and Craft of American Journalism:
Essays From The Poynter Institute. Gainesville,
FL: University Press of Florida, 2005.

American Society of Newspaper Editors
ASNE Statement of Principles. Reston, VA:
American Society of Newspaper Editors, 2002.
http://www.asne.org/kiosk/archive/
principl.htm

The First Amendment Handbook. Arlington,
VA: The Reporters Committee for Freedom of
the Press, 2003.
http://www.rcfp.org/handbook/index.html
Hachten, William A. Troubles of Journalism: A
Critical Look at What’s Right and Wrong With
the Press. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum
Associates, 3rd edition, 2004.
Hamilton, James T. All the News That’s Fit to
Sell: How the Market Transforms Information
Into News. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University
Press, 2003.
Overholser, Geneva, and Kathleen Hall
Jamieson. The Press. New York, NY: Oxford
University Press, 2005.

Radio-Television News Directors
Association
Code of Ethics and Professional Conduct.
Washington, DC: Radio-Television News
Directors Association, 2000.
http://www.rtnda.org/ethics/coe.shtml
Society of Professional Journalists
SPJ Code of Ethics. Indianapolis, IN: Society of
Professional Journalists, 1996.
http://spj.org/ethics.asp
International Center for Journalists
Code of Ethics (by country and region).
Washington, DC.
English version: http://www.ijnet.org/
Director.aspx?P=Ethics

Sloan, W. David and Lisa Mullikin Parcell (eds.)
American Journalism: History, Principles,
Practices. Jefferson, NC: McFarland &
Company, 2002.
Sullivan, Marguerite H. A Responsible Press
Office: An Insider’s Guide. Washington,
DC: U.S. Department of State, International
Information Programs, 2001.
http://usinfo.state.gov/products/pubs/
pressoffice/

The U.S. Department of State assumes no
responsibility for the content and availability
of the resources from other agencies and
organizations listed above. All Internet links
were active as of Fall 2006.

64

Executive Editor : George Clack
Writer : Deborah Potter
Editor : Mildred Solá Neely
Ar t Director/Design : Min-Chih Yao
Illustrations : Bryan Leister

This publication is a companion volume to
A Responsible Press Office: An Insider’s
Guide by Marguerite H. Sullivan
(http://usinfo.state.gov/products/pubs/
pressoffice/).

The opinions expressed in this publication do
not necessarily reflect the views or policies of
the U.S. government.

Bureau of International Information Programs
U.S. Department of State
http://usinfo.state.gov/
2006

Bureau of International Information Programs
U.S. DEPARTMENT OF STATE
http://usinfo.state.gov/

